Chapter II: On the General Divisions of Intellectual Habits

Precepts

The general divisions of intellectual habits are thirteen in number, in this order.
Intellectual habits are:

I. True, or false. 
The former prepare the intellect to assent to true principles and conclusions; the latter prepare the intellect to assent to false principles and conclusions.

II. Right, or distorted. 
The former prepare the intellect to contemplate truth and falsehood well; the latter, to contemplate either truth or falsehood poorly.

III. Innate, or adventitious.
The former are implanted in man by GOD; the latter come from outside, through either divine or human instruction.
There are habits which are "beings," or "divine beings," or infused; here they are "acquired."
Innate are called "innate" and "infused."

IV. Liberal, or illiberal.
The former make a man competent to perform intellectual tasks; the latter make him competent to perform bodily tasks.

V. Simple or mixed.
The former determine the intellect to the knowledge of a single object; the latter, to the knowledge of various objects.

VI. Necessary, or contingent.
The former prepare the intellect for knowledge of immutable principles and conclusions; the latter, for knowledge of mutable principles and conclusions.

VII. Of this life, or the future life.
The former make a man competent for the duties of animal life in the state of nature, or spiritual life in the state of grace; the latter, for the duties of spiritual life in the state of glory.

VIII. Theoretical, practical, or poetic.
The former prepare the intellect for knowledge of principles and conclusions with the aim of understanding truth; the practical prepare the intellect for knowledge of principles and conclusions with the aim of enacting good; the poetic prepare the intellect for knowledge of principles and conclusions with the aim of producing good.

IX. Total, or partial.
The former cause the intellect to be engaged with the whole system of one discipline, or a collection composed of parts from various disciplines; the latter cause the intellect to be engaged with a part of another discipline.

X. Ordinary, or extraordinary.
The former prepare the intellect according to the ordinary course of nature or grace; the latter elevate it above the ordinary course of nature or grace.

XI. Imperfect, or perfect.
The former prepare the intellect in some part; the latter, in every part.

XII. Noetic, or dianoetic.
The former prepare the intellect for the contemplation of non-discursive things; the latter, for discursive things.

XIII. Natural, or supernatural.
Both are referred to by reason of the object, or the mode, or both.

RULES.

I. The truth and falsity of intellectual habits, as well as their correctness and distortion, depend on the assent to the object.
Intellectual and moral habits have some things in common, and some things unique, as can be seen from the divisions just presented.
For example, both are ordinary or extraordinary, true or false, correct or distorted, etc.
For virtue is ordinary or extraordinary; similarly vice.
Yet virtue is a moral habit that is true and correct; vice is a moral habit that is true indeed, but not correct.
Furthermore, virtue and vice are purely practical habits, not theoretical ones.
Again, intellectual habits admit general or special divisions: of which the former are relevant here; the latter are explained in the following chapters.
As far as the general divisions of intellectual habits are concerned, the first is that some are true, others false.
This division arises from the assent to the object.
For the habits of our minds revolve around truth or falsehood, as does the mind itself.
Although the "proper," or "domestic," object of the intellect is truth, it may also, by accident, become occupied with falsehood.
Moreover, our mind can be occupied with truth and falsehood in two ways: rightly, or otherwise.
For it either affirms the truth and denies the false; or it affirms the false and denies the true.
In the former, it performs its duty; in the latter, it ceases from duty.
Hence arises the second division, that some intellectual habits are correct, others distorted.
Thus, sometimes the intellect deviates concerning the cognition of truth: specifically when it turns light into darkness and sweet into bitter, as Scripture speaks.
Here, one must hold to that golden rule of truth and falsity, which is explained in first philosophy and logic: Those things which are conjoined or disjoined in the nature of things ought to be conjoined or disjoined in speech, both internal and external (the Greeks call it a "comprehensive account" or a "secure account").
If it is done otherwise, the speech is false.
Therefore, if our intellect affirms what is consistent and denies what is inconsistent, its operation is true and correct; but if it does the opposite, its operation is false and distorted.
For example, these statements are true: GOD is omnipotent, GOD is not the author of sin, because they affirm what is consistent and deny what is inconsistent.
But the contrary statements are false; GOD is not omnipotent, GOD is the author of sin; because they deny what is consistent and affirm what is inconsistent.
Moreover, correct habits are such either truly and in accordance with truth, or falsely and according to opinion.

II. Intellectual habits are called innate and adventitious ambiguously.
Firstly, innate habits are said to be those that are materially and formally implanted in us by GOD.
Such was the complete image of GOD in Adam before the fall; and after the fall, it is the remaining image of GOD in us: to which belong intelligence, synderesis, and conscience.
Then, innate habits are those that are implanted materially, but not formally.
In this sense, all natural habits are innate, while only supernatural habits are adventitious.
Indeed, the true and proper cause of natural intellectual habits is the light of the intellect, by which we perceive predicates to be either immediately or mediately related to subjects.
Therefore, it is necessary that all individual natural intellectual habits are inborn in us; either materially and formally, like intelligence, etc., or only materially, like knowledge, art, etc.
For these latter habits are acquired with great labor and difficulty; and thus they are not innate to us like the former.
Finally, habits are called innate according to the beginning or perfection.
In the latter way, habits were innate in Adam; in the former way, they are in us.
Thus, for example, the light of nature is innate in us initially, because it must be nurtured more and more in us and made clearer through frequent exercise.
And hence it is that the light of nature and intelligence, likewise the law of nature and synderesis, are distinguished as raw and polished habits, or as initial and consummate; indeed, sometimes intelligence and synderesis alone are referred to by the name of habit, and not the light of nature and the law of nature.
Now let us unfold the ambiguity in the other part of the division.
Adventitious habits are called either broadly or strictly.
Broadly, insofar as adventitious habits are subdivided into acquired and infused.
The former come naturally; the latter, supernaturally.
Strictly, insofar as adventitious and acquired are considered synonyms; and thus adventitious habits are opposed to infused ones.
Again, acquired habits are sometimes broadly said to be those that are acquired through divine or human instruction; and thus acquired and infused habits cannot be opposed.
However, this distribution is most commonly used, that habits are innate, acquired, and infused; this trichotomy can be referred back to our dichotomy.
If someone among us asks how this distribution agrees with the common definition, by which a habit is said to be a permanent quality introduced by frequent actions: let him have this answer; that definition is not of the genus, but of a species; that is, it pertains not to every habit, but only to the acquired habit.
For it is beyond controversy that the image of GOD, namely wisdom and original justice, was a habit in Adam; and that the light of nature in us is a habit, e.g., the "one in synderesis"; and finally, that the prophetic light, saving faith, and similar gifts of GOD are habits in us.
But indeed that narrow definition of habit, which is commonly circulated, does not apply to such cases. Thus it must be concluded that a single action can introduce a habit, if it is sufficiently effective, as is the action of GOD creating and recreating, or regenerating.
For the schools rightly teach that GOD can imprint a natural and supernatural form with a single action; both of which are rightly designated by the name of habit, because they make us capable of acting, just as we see the acquired habit also derives its name from this.
For it would not be a habit if it did not render its subject capable, that is, prompt and ready to act.

III. Liberal and illiberal habits differ in kind.
Liberal habits are those which incline a person to perform the duties of the mind.
They can be innate or acquired.
The former prepare a person for knowledge insofar as it is knowledge, such as intellect, intelligence; the latter prepare the same person for knowledge insofar as one may be called learned and educated, such as wisdom, knowledge, etc.
Illiberal habits do not make a person truly learned and educated, but prepare one for duties that are performed by the body's external members.
From this, it is concluded that this is a distribution of the genus into species.

IV. Simple and mixed, or composite, habits differ as part and whole.
The distribution of intellectual habits into simple and mixed; or, as some prefer to say, into singular and aggregative or collective, is very necessary. 
It cannot be the case that philosophy, or theoretical philosophy, or practical philosophy, or theology, etc., are simple habits; because they consist of a collection of multiple habits.
Thus philosophy is a composite habit made up of many theoretical and practical habits; theoretical philosophy is a composite habit made up of many theoretical habits, etc.
Therefore, simple habits relate to composite ones as parts relate to a collective whole.
For simple habits are those that contemplate a single object, which may be theoretical, practical, or poetic.
Composite habits, on the other hand, consist of several simple ones; for example, supernatural theology is a habit consisting of supernatural wisdom and prudence, or of supernatural theory and practice.
But theology, considered in its full breadth, is a habit that is partly natural and partly supernatural, as will be seen below.
Furthermore, simple habits in another sense are those that concern either principles or conclusions; mixed are those that concern both principles and conclusions together, like wisdom and knowledge.

V. Necessary and contingent habits are called such, not by reason of the subject, but by form.
The subject of our intellect includes necessary or contingent things.
Necessary things are those which do not depend on our choice but are such by their nature, apart from our action, like God and natural things.
Contingent things are those which depend on our action, whether of the mind, like artificial things, or of the will, like virtues and vices.
When intellectual habits are divided into necessary and contingent, it is not done by reason of this object.
Indeed, propositions about necessary things, that is, natural things, can be contingent; and about contingent things, that is, moral and artificial things, can be necessary.
So here is the meaning of our division.
Necessary habits are those that are necessarily true or false; contingent habits are those that are contingently true or false.
Thus, for example, intelligence is a necessarily true habit; opinion is a habit that is contingently true or false.

VI. Habits in the state of journeying and in the state of home, although they differ almost entirely in kind, are rightly joined in a Hexalogy.
For it is necessary here to explain all the intellectual habits through which our mind is directed to its operation, and this for two reasons.
First, the breadth of this doctrine requires it.
Then, the comparison of all and individual habits brings much light to every kind of doctrine.
Therefore, it should not be thought that a mark of curiosity is imprinted on us, or that the law of homogeneity is violated, when in this pre-theory of the faculties we establish the difference concerning the intellectual habit of future life, which Scholastic theologians, indeed elegantly, call the homeland, or the state of home.

VII. It makes no difference whether habits are divided in a binary way into theoretical and practical, or in a quadruple way into theoretical, practical, and poetic.
This rule will have great use in the future.
Therefore, we will explain it a little more thoroughly.
To start from here, the terms theory and practice are not taken in only one way.
For theory, or contemplation, sometimes in the most general notion is the same as knowledge; and thus it is the knowledge of truth or good.
Hence, philosophers divide theory, or contemplation, into pure and mixed.
The former is occupied with truth and is content with itself, that is, it is not ordered or directed further, as is the knowledge of divine truth; the latter is occupied with good and is ordered further, namely towards action, as is the knowledge of virtue.
Sometimes theory, or contemplation, or speculation, is strictly placed for the knowledge of truth, or for pure contemplation, which is otherwise called sincere.
Similarly, practice, or action, sometimes in the most general sense is the same as use; and thus every discipline has theory and practice.
Hence, you see Arithmetic, Geometry, etc., commonly divided into theoretical and practical.
Sometimes practice is precisely the same as the action of good.
And in this sense, Philosophy, indeed our entire life, is divided into theoretical and practical.
For the knowledge of truth and the action of good are two wings, according to the opinion of the Academics, by which man, the philosopher, is raised and returns to the celestial homeland.
And so indeed you commonly see this dichotomy taken; such that some disciplines are theoretical, others practical, not both theoretical and practical at the same time.
And in this sense also, the arts, which are strictly so called, do not fall under that division, and thus are not parts of philosophy, but instruments of it.
For philosophy equally uses, for example, Rhetoric or Logic, as instruments, as theology, jurisprudence, and medicine.
In this way, then, the term practice is taken in opposition, in relation to the term theory.
But you also see it taken together; thus namely that under practice is comprehended insight in this manner.
Philosophy is either theoretical or practical; and this is either practical in the excellent sense thus called, which is otherwise called moral; or poetic, which is otherwise called artificial.
And when the term philosophy is taken broadly as well.
Thus, Aristotle in his books, especially in book 6 of the Metaphysics, chapter 1, establishes three kinds of disciplines: the practical, the technical, and the truth-seeking; contemplative, active, and productive.
But Zabarella, in book 1 of De Natura Logicae and elsewhere, reduces that threefold division of Aristotle to a twofold one.
Therefore, he says that one discipline is contemplative, another operative.
And this again either efficiently or poetically.
From this, it is seen in what sense intellectual habits can be divided either into just theoretical and practical; or into theoretical, practical, and poetic at the same time.
Poetic are otherwise called organic by some.
But see more on this opinion below in the technologics, where the distribution of the four faculties, as they are called, is discussed.

VIII. Total and partial habits are referred to ambiguously.
First, a total and composite habit and a partial and simple habit are taken by some as the same. 
For example, philosophy is a total habit, physics, a partial one.
Then, for others, a total habit is one that deals with the entire system of a discipline. 
Hence, there are as many species of it as there are systems of disciplines. 
A partial habit is one that deals with some part of a discipline, as is the knowledge of some physical conclusion.
Finally, a total habit is one that deals with a system either of a single discipline or of a collection compiled from various disciplines. 
Hence, there are more species of total habits than there are disciplines. 
From this, it is seen why some divide intellectual habits in this manner. 
An intellectual habit is simple or composite.
A simple habit is total or partial. 
A total habit is acquired by the knowledge of an entire discipline. 
A partial habit is acquired by the knowledge of just a certain part of a discipline. 
A composite habit is one that is acquired by the knowledge of multiple disciplines.

IX. Ordinary and extraordinary habits exist in the realm of potential, grace, and glory.
The ordinary habits of the mind in the realm of potential, or nature, are intelligence, synderesis, wisdom, etc., as they are commonly found in most people; in the realm of grace, there is faith; in the realm of glory, there is the light of glory.
Extraordinary habits in the realm of nature are heroic intelligence, synderesis, wisdom, etc.; in the realm of grace, there are certain singular gifts, such as the gift of tongues, prophetic light, etc.
In the realm of glory, there are those additions by which some will be adorned above others in future life, for example, Prophets and Apostles above other faithful. 
For Scripture testifies that there will be certain ranks in eternal life, 1 Corinthians 15. 
Moreover, what is required for a habit to be and be called extraordinary, we have explained in Moral Philosophy.

X. Imperfect and perfect habits differ by degree.
Perfect and imperfect can differ either in kind or by degree.
In kind: as God and man; or perfect and imperfect wisdom in a privative sense.
By degree: as perfect and imperfect wisdom in a negative sense.
When intellectual (and indeed moral) habits are divided into perfect and imperfect, it is a distinction of degree, as they say.
For the meaning here is that some are incomplete, which are called "dispositions" by logicians, and others are complete, which are properly called habits.

XI. Noetic and dianoetic habits are thus divided according to the different operations of the intellect and the different nature of intelligible objects.
An intellectual habit is noetic (νοητικός) when we know the truth immediately, without any demonstration.
In this way, the first truths are understood, which are called first theoretical and practical principles.
A habit is dianoetic (διανοητικός) when we know the truth through syllogistic reasoning.
There is intelligence and synderesis in the former; in the latter, there is knowledge, art, etc.
Hence, it is clear that noetic and dianoetic habits pertain to different operations of the intellect and a diverse nature of intelligibles.
The operation of the intellect is either the apprehension of simple things, composition and division, or discourse.
The first and second operations are noetic; the third is dianoetic.
Furthermore, intelligible things either cohere immediately, as in "God is," or mediately, as in "God is to be worshiped."
The former is the noetic judgment; the latter, the dianoetic judgment.

XII. Natural and supernatural habits are so called by reason of the object, mode, or both.
Firstly, by reason of the object, natural habits are those that pertain to natural things, such as Physics, Arithmetic, etc., which are natural sciences.
Therefore, supernatural habits are those that pertain to supernatural things, such as Theology, which is an arcane wisdom and supernatural prudence because it is concerned with things pertaining to the school of Grace.
Secondly, by reason of the mode, natural habits are those that are acquired naturally.
In this sense, both Physics and Theology, which we refer to as ordinary in schools, are natural habits.
But supernatural habits by reason of mode are those that, even though they deal with natural things, are acquired in a supernatural way. For example, the Physics divinely given to Solomon.
Finally, by reason of both the object and mode together, natural habits are those that deal with natural things and are acquired naturally, as is the Physics we learn.
Supernatural habits are those that deal with supernatural things and are also acquired in a supernatural way, as is the theology that Paul learned in an instant.
