CHAPTER IV.

On Wisdom.

PRECEPTS.

An adventitius habit follows, which is either acquired or infused.

An acquired habit (by one's own effort) is necessary or contingent.

A necessary habit is theoretical, practical, or poetic.

A theoretical habit is Wisdom or Science.

Wisdom is a contemplative habit, by which one is inclined to assent to necessary conclusions through first and highest causes.

Its proper role, after intelligence, synderesis, and conscience, is to hold the first position among the natural habits of the mind.

RULES.

I. Wisdom deals with first principles, in order to demonstrate conclusions from them. 
The term wisdom is understood in three ways. 
Firstly, it is taken to mean the knowledge of all sciences, or certainly most of them, in which someone excels. 
Secondly, it is taken to mean the excellence of any art or science; in this sense, we call anyone wise who has not merely attained ordinary skill in some art but has reached the pinnacle of perfection. 
Thus, according to Aristotle in Nicomachean Ethics, book 6, chapter 9, one is called "wise in geometry" and absolutely wise as a philosopher. 
Thirdly, wisdom is understood strictly as a composed habit, namely, one that concerns itself with first principles and the conclusions to be derived from them. 
Hence, Zabarella says that wisdom is nothing other than knowledge combined with understanding. 
But this is not wholly acceptable to us. 
For science is the knowledge of a thing through the nearest cause.
Whereas wisdom is the knowledge of a thing through the first cause. 
Therefore, it is not quite correct to call wisdom a composit habit from intellect and science; rather, it remains a composit habit from the knowledge of principles and conclusions. 
In which manner science is also a composit habit. 
Lastly, wisdom is taken in the strictest sense as the habit that deals with first, that is, the most general, principles, and those conclusions. 
In this way, any single, most perfect and most excellent science is called wisdom, as is Metaphysics. 
And from this habit, a man is called a philosopher and a lover of opinion.

II. There are six attributes of wisdom taken in the strictest sense: namely, to know all things; to know difficult things; to engage in the accurate method of proving; to have the greatest aptitude for teaching; to be most desirable; and, lastly, to preside over all.
Firstly, it is the role of wisdom to know all things, not individually and in minute detail, but according to the primary sources of knowledge, that is, the first principles. 
For whoever holds these can judge all things, like an architect. 
I expressly stated, not to teach everything minutely in that noble wisdom, because if anyone believes that they can know everything down to the smallest species, they should not be considered wise, but a sophist. 
For it can happen that in this manner any mortal achieves knowledge of all things, and thus becomes a pansophist. 
Hence, the ancient Sophists, who professed to know everything minutely, and therefore rejected no question, whatever it was about, were criticized by Socrates and Plato; and because of that pretentious wisdom which they claimed for themselves, the name of the sophists, which was previously honorable, became a term of contempt. 
After them came the Grammarians, who professed to know everything not through theatrical debates, like the Sophists, but through private writings. 
These Grammarians, as Plato reports in the Alcibiades, were very different from those ancient Grammarians, who, along with the title of Critic and honorary title, had the power to judge all writings because they were not only most learned in the more humane letters but also most versed with praise in all parts of philosophy.
The wise man is not like those inept Sophists and Grammarians; indeed, he ought to know everything, not individually, but as it can be done. 
It can be done, however, according to the primary sources of knowledge, which is the knowledge of first causes and principles.
The second attribute of wisdom is to know the things that are difficult for man. 
Some inept astrologers and magicians claim this for themselves. 
But these do not profess things difficult for man, but impossible and incomprehensible. 
True wisdom, however, is to deliver the first principles; understanding of which is not impossible, even if it is the most difficult of all.
Thirdly, wisdom is entirely in the accurate method of proving: which is based on the independence, clarity, and dignity of principles. 
Mathematicians indeed claim this praise for themselves, that they have the most noble demonstrations. 
But this is not so: since metaphysical principles are the first or independent. 
Along with the independence of principles is joined the greatest nobility of things, and the utmost clarity from the nature of the thing.
The fourth attribute of wisdom is to have the greatest aptitude for teaching; not indeed in terms of the manner of teaching (for Logic has the greatest aptitude for teaching in this sense) but in terms of the principles of knowledge. 
The principles from which we teach, however, have a prior and more important place than the mode of teaching.
Fifthly, wisdom is most desirable: as it is of the highest and most general things, namely the first principles; which are the most worthy knowledge.
Finally, the sixth attribute of wisdom is to preside over all, not indeed by practical governance (for that is peculiar to Politics, to impose a mode upon the sciences, to defend them, and to direct them towards the common good) but by theoretical governance, which is the least troublesome of all directions. 
But this governance consists in wisdom prescribing to the other disciplines their subjects and imparting to them common principles.

III. Wisdom, science, and prudence are acquired naturally or supernaturally.
They are naturally acquired in two ways. 
For by one's own effort, a person can engage with natural or supernatural things. 
In this case, philosophical sciences and prudence are called natural; whereas theology is called supernatural wisdom and prudence. 
They are acquired supernaturally, however, insofar as they are infused: in the way philosophy was infused in Solomon, and theology in Paul.