CHAPTER V.

On Knowledge.

PRECEPTS.

KNOWLEDGE is a contemplative habit by which someone is inclined to assent to necessary conclusions through their proper or proximate causes, but not through primary ones.

Its adjuncts (though not its own) are two: evidence and certainty.

Evidence is that by which a conclusion is known clearly.

Certainty is that by which a conclusion is known without doubt and fear.

RULES.

I. Knowledge is both actual and habitual cognition that is both certain and evident, arising from proximate principles.
The term knowledge is taken both broadly and narrowly.
Broadly it is taken for any intellectual habit; in which sense any discipline can be called knowledge.
Narrowly it is taken for that habit which we acquire through proper demonstration; how it is taken here.
And in this way, knowledge is partly actual and partly habitual cognition.
Actual cognition is the assent to a conclusion; habitual is the habit generated through actual cognition.
Commonly, however, the term knowledge is taken for habitual cognition.
Furthermore, knowledge taken in itself is certain cognition, that is, such that the intellect firmly adheres to some object, without doubt and fear.
Understand true adherence, by which the intellect adheres to some object due to the very truth of the thing, or solid and firm reasoning, or infallible truth: not apparent, by which the intellect takes probable reasoning for necessary, and thus firmly adheres to its false opinion or error, just as one adheres to knowledge.
And because of this certainty, knowledge is said to be an assent ὑμεπετάτωι ἢ ἀμετάκινητος, unwavering and unchangeable.
Moreover, evidence is attributed to knowledge, which requires clarity of light above firm adherence.
This evidence is due to the fact that the conclusion is demonstrated through a proximate cause, which alone is said to generate knowledge and satisfy the question "why."
Therefore, it is not necessary here to come to the first and most general principles, but rather to zealously seek those proximate ones, which are the cause of the connection of subject and predicate.
For example, if it is asked why a human is capable of laughter, the proximate cause is sought from the form of a human, which is rationality.
For form is the efficient cause of a property: an efficient cause, I say, through emanation.

II. Knowledge is not of corruptible singular things, insofar as they are singular.
Knowledge is often taken for intuitive cognition: and in this way, God and angels know singulars.
And such their intuitive knowledge has the most perfect nature of knowledge.
We also, through our senses, have intuitive knowledge of singulars: which can be called knowledge in a broad sense.
But if the term knowledge is strictly taken, for discursive knowledge, which is obtained through true demonstration, singulars must be distinctly considered.
Indeed, some singulars are incorruptible, which are so singular that they eminently and most perfectly obtain specific perfection: like God, and angels, as well as the sun, moon, earth, and similar things, which are called καθόλου, that is, such that no similar ones are given to them.
These singulars are said to be firm with negative firmness: because they do not perish of themselves.
And it is certain that knowledge can be had about these singulars.
Others are corruptible singulars, which are called καθ᾽ ἕκαστα, and are infinite in number: like Peter, Paul, this horse, this rose.
These singulars are said to be firm with affirmative firmness: because they are such for a time.
And about these, the following theorems should be accepted: Knowledge can only be of universals: Knowledge is of those things which cannot be otherwise: Knowledge is not of singulars: Knowledge is not of those infinite in number.
Indeed, the perfect definition of these singulars is not established for us, nor are their properties perfectly known by us.
Therefore, there cannot be discursive knowledge about them: as it alone is obtained through definition.
And these are true for singulars, as they are singulars, distinguished by individual differences.
Otherwise, if singulars are considered as participating in a specific nature, there can be knowledge about them.
For if knowledge can be had about the species by itself firstly, and immediately, there will also be knowledge of singulars by the participation and application of the same knowledge of the species to them.
Because, if it is demonstrated that man is capable of laughter, it can also be proven about Peter, by applying the same demonstration to him.

III. About no accidental being, as it is such, can knowledge be given.
An accidental being is that which is composed of multiple beings by extrinsic fact: like the white being and the musical.
And it is fourfold.
First, the concrete, which results from two things naturally occurring together and united, like white and quantity.
And of this being, as such, no knowledge is given.
Otherwise, there can be knowledge of concretes if they are considered abstractly; because there is a definition of the same, and therefore a demonstration: as if we consider white and quantity separately.
Thus indeed we can define white and quantity: the former as that which is disaggregative to sight; the latter as that which has extended parts.
Then there is the collective, and it can be either orderly, as an army is; or disorderly, as a heap of wheat is.
Regarding disorderly collectives, there can be no knowledge in any way.
For they in no way have one nature, nor one rationale: and thus they cannot be explained by one definition, nor have determined passions or properties that can be demonstrated about them.
And thus they are called accidental beings in every way.
But if considered as orderly collective beings, they are knowable.
Although they are one by accident in entity: they are yet one by themselves in order.
And therefore they can be defined by a single definition, and they can have determined passions that are proven about them.
Thus Music treats of numerical sound, or numerous sound, and Perspective of the visual line; as of their proper objects.
Thirdly, there is the casual accidental being, which consists of two things occurring by chance: like that summer weather is cold and rainy; that a musician is also a builder.
Finally, there is the fortuitous accidental being, which is from two things occurring by fortune, as commonly said: like the discovery of treasure with the excavation of the earth.
Such accidental beings, I mean casual and fortuitous, as such, do not fall under knowledge; because they are absolutely contingent and by accident.
Hence they cannot be defined, nor have any passion that can be demonstrated about them.
Meanwhile, there can be knowledge and demonstration from them, that casual things are fortuitous.
For the casual and fortuitous, considered in common, have a rationale that is one by itself, and considered by itself, as they say.

IV. The complete nature of knowledge is contained in three things: subject, properties, and principles.
First, there is the knowable subject, about which something is demonstrated.
And around this, as its focus, knowledge revolves.
Then, properties or passions, which necessarily follow the nature of the subject, are to be demonstrated.
Thirdly, because nothing is demonstrated by itself, it is necessary to provide principles, and indeed proximate ones, through which the properties are demonstrated of the subject.
And nothing else, apart from these three, is found that can pertain to the substance of knowledge.

V. Opinion is opposed to knowledge, as the imperfect to the perfect: ignorance partly as a privation to a habit, partly as contrary to the contrary.
For opinion is a wavering assent, since knowledge is an immutable assent.
Moreover, ignorance is twofold, καθ᾽ ἀφαίρεσιν and κατ᾽ ἔξιν, of simple or pure negation, and of depraved disposition.
The former is mere privation of knowledge, such as is in children and idiots: otherwise it is called negative ignorance, and according to negation; the latter is the false persuasion of knowledge, and is called assumed ignorance, or affected as well, which presents reason for its error, insinuating itself under the guise of demonstration, such as is the opinion of the Turks on religion, and likewise the Sophists, who, although they know nothing, pretend to know.
And this is ignorance contracted by a vicious habit.
The former is opposed to knowledge as privation; the latter as contrary, indeed something positive.
For vice, as it is the privation of a habit, is oppositively privative to habit: as it is a bad habit or act, it is opposed contrarily to a good habit or act.