CHAPTER VII.  
On Art and Eloquence.  

PRECEPTS.  

There follow the necessary acquired habits for the poet, which incline us to properly apply ourselves to poetic propositions.  

And there are two: art and eloquence.  

Art is the poetic habit by which one is inclined to assent to poetic conclusions.  

Eloquence is the poetic habit by which one is inclined to express well the sentiments of one's mind.

RULES.  

I. Poetic intelligence preserves the principles of both liberal and illiberal arts.  
There are threefold principles, namely theoretical, practical, and poetic: of which the former direct the knowledge of truth, the latter the action of moral good, and the remaining the action of artificial good.  
It is therefore necessary that a threefold habit be established according to the number of these principles.  
Thus, there is a threefold intelligence, namely theoretical, practical, and poetic.  
The first is called intelligence simply, the second synteresis, and the third lacks a name, and thus it can be called poetic, or organic intelligence; because it regards those principles that occur in organic disciplines, which are thus called because they propose organs or instruments, whether they be mental or manual.  
Nor are we moved here by that which Suarez states, that it is not necessary for a habit to be established for the principles of organic arts, on the ground that Metaphysics teaches the causes and roots of logical instruments and the like.  
For just as practical principles depend on theoretical ones; and nonetheless there is a proper habit for practical principles, namely synteresis: so it is also in poetics or organics.  
Indeed, just as these practical principles, which are supreme in the action of good: Honorable things are to be done, Shameful things are to be avoided, are preserved in synteresis; so these poetic principles: What is said of everything is also said of something, given a sufficient cause in action the effect is established, are preserved in poetic intellect; which is the poetic habit, that is, whether by discourse, and intelligence and synteresis.

II. Art is the dianoetic habit of contingent conclusions, partly liberal, partly mechanical.  
The term "art" is understood broadly or narrowly.  
Broadly, it refers to any discipline, as among orators and in everyday speech.  
But here it is taken narrowly, for a habit effective with right reason.  
Understand this as liberal and mechanical making: both of which are organic, although by preeminence, liberal making is called organic, such as when art is said to be a habit either organic, like Logic; or mechanical, like Architecture.  
Although the conclusions of philosophical and mechanical arts differ greatly, distinct habits are not established for them; because mechanical conclusions tend to the same end as philosophical ones, namely towards creation, or making, and the use of instruments.

III. Any art has two parts, one teaching, the other operating or using.  
The teaching part is that which imparts the knowledge of the art itself: the operating part is that which acts from knowledge.  
In the same way, practical philosophy, and indeed prudence, is divided into teaching and acting.  
The teaching part is contained in precepts, which by reading we attain knowledge of virtues and vices, and we are taught the truth about what good should be done and what evil not done: but we do not act yet, although through this action we are made more apt to act well.  
The acting part, however, is contained in the action itself.

IV. Art presupposes or includes prudence.  
Indeed, it cannot happen that the instruments of art can be rightly applied without considering the circumstances.  
However, this habit should not therefore be called a mixed habit of prudence and art, as Keckermann writes about Rhetoric or rather Oratory: because it is one thing to include essentially, another to include by reason of circumstances.  
In the latter way, art includes prudence, which primarily and chiefly deals with internal acts, and secondarily with external ones, insofar as the latter arise from the former.

V. Eloquence is the habit of poetic conclusions, insofar as all other habits ought to be brought to light by their aid.  
For the goal of our studies is partly understanding, that is, the knowledge of things; partly expressive power, that is, the ability to express the sentiments of the mind well.  
The former is the foundation of the latter; the latter is the ornament of the former.