CHAPTER ONE. Concerning the necessity and causes of intellectual habits.

PRECEPTS.

ENCYCLOPEDIA is a methodical comprehension of all things that in this life must be learned by man.
Therefore, not incorrectly could you call it Pandects, and a University of disciplines.
Its two highest chapters are: first, concerning the preliminary knowledge of all disciplines; second, concerning the disciplines themselves.

The preliminary knowledge of all disciplines is an anticipated instruction, preparing the mind of the learner for an easier understanding of the disciplines.
Its parts are twofold: first, concerning the nature of disciplines, and second, concerning the study of them.

The nature of disciplines is known by their differences and similarities.

The differences of disciplines is regarding the habits of the mind, and the kinds of disciplines themselves.
In the former is Hexilogy, in the latter, Technology.

Hexilogy is the first of the four preliminary disciplines, concerning intellectual habits.
Intellectual habits are qualities that determine the intellect to more easily perceive their objects, that is, all intelligible things.
They are called in the same sense habits of the mind, "qualities of the intellect", and intellectual virtues.

These habits are considered in general and in specific terms.
One part of Hexilogy is general, the other is special.
General Hexilogy learns the necessity, general causes, and division of intellectual habits.

The necessity for intellectual habits is one thing regarding the learner, and another regarding the disciplines.
There it is the imperfection of man; here it is the perfection of the discipline.

The causes of intellectual habits are either above man, such as the grace of God, or within man, such as nature, teaching, and exercise.

RULES.

I. Encyclopaedia is the system of all systems, by which things worthy of man are explained in a certain method.
Encyclopaedia is a Greek word.
For ἐγκυκλοπαιδεία is said as if ἐγκύκλιος παιδεία, that is, a cycle of disciplines, which used to be reckoned by the number of seven liberal arts.
Thus Quintilian in book 1, chapter 10, teaching that knowledge of many arts is necessary for the future orator.
Now concerning other arts, he says, which I think boys should be instructed in before they are handed over to the rhetorician, I will briefly add, so that the cycle of that learning may be created, which the Greeks call ἐγκυκλοπαιδεία.
Among which arts he counts music and geometry.
Thus Encyclopaedia in this sense is the system of the seven liberal arts, which are contained in this verse.
    Language, trope, reasoning, number, tenor, angle, stars.
Also in these two mnemonic verses:
    Grammar speaks, Dialectic teaches the truth, Rhetoric colors words,
    Music sings, Arithmetic counts, Geometry measures, Astronomy teaches the stars.

And thus indeed this word is strictly taken.
Broadly, it signifies the structure of all disciplines: as in that of Vitruvius, book 1, chapter 1.
For when they observed that all disciplines have a connection and communication of things among themselves, it was easily believed that nature could learn such a vast number of teachings.
For the encyclopedic discipline, like one body, is composed of these members.
And in the preface of book 6, concerning his parents: "They took care to educate me in art, and in that which cannot be approved without literature and the cycle of all disciplines."
Similarly, Athenaeus towards the end of book 5 uses this word: "encýclios and the cycle of education."
And in book 13 concerning Epicurus: "he neglects the cycle of education."
But in the preface concerning the poet Monius, he takes it strictly: "in which he teaches the cycle of education with expertise."
Thus also Suidas takes "the cycle of education"; Gregory, "the cycle of education," and Plutarch in Alexander, "playing in the cycle."
And since this cycle of studies was even learned by some from the common people, it thus came about that "encýclios" is taken to mean "trivial, common."
Aristotle in Politics 1 teaches: "he who relates the various encýclios arts," which he calls "the shadow."
The same in book 2 calls vulgar and common works "encýclios works."
Similarly, Isocrates to Nicocles says: "acting with all our skill regarding the encýclios."
Again, Aristotle in "On the Heavens" 1 mentions "encyclios philosophy," and in Ethics 3 says "encyclios logic," which he calls "intellectual exercises."
And Horace referred to this in the "Art of Poetry":
    "The public material will be of private right, if
    you do not stay around the cheap and common circle."
That is, if you pursue thoughts not taken from the commonplace nor from trivial sources.
Thus therefore ἐγκυκλοπαιδεία or εγκυκλοπαιδεία is taken broadly for the cycle of teachings of philosophies: or strictly, for the cycle either of the seven liberal arts, or of all common arts.
But here we take it in its broadest sense for the cycle of all disciplines, and indeed for the totality πανταχούνας, which are indeed worthy of man.
Therefore this our work, which we have brought back to the anvil, we now no longer call the Encyclopaedia of the philosophical course or the philosophical Encyclopaedia, but absolutely Encyclopaedia, that is, the system of all systems ἐγκύκλιων, that is, so arranged as to make a complete system or cycle of all disciplines which we use in this life.
Therefore not without reason might we say we are here planning certain Pandects.
Giovanni Colle the Italian calls Encyclopaedia the Idea and the Theatre of the Imitating and the Imitable.
The Imitating are the disciplines themselves, whose end is to imitate God and nature.
The Imitable are the objects of the disciplines.
Thus these two are given in the Encyclopaedia, as if in an idea and a theatre.
Hence there is the Theatre of Metaphysics, Logic, Grammar, and the remaining disciplines.

II. All learning is from preliminary knowledge.
Correctly, Aristotle states in Ethics 6, chapter 4: "Understanding consists in knowing all things."
And again, in Posterior Analytics 1, he attests that all learning proceeds from previous knowledge.
Vives, Zabarella, and Keckermann call this preliminary knowledge Præcognita.
These præcognita are of two kinds: innate or adventitious, and these acquired or insipid.
Acquired ones are thematic, problematic, and systematic; those and these partial, these total.
Thematic præcognita are those which are preemitted in the handling of a simple theme; as if it is to be discussed about God, something must at least be known beforehand, e.g., being, good.
Problematic præcognita are those which are preemitted in the handling of problems, that is, controversial questions, before the actual pragmatic arguments, e.g., if the question is whether Philosophy and Theology conflict with each other; certain præcognita must be collected on the part of the subject and the predicate.
Systematic præcognita are instruction preparing the mind of the learner to more easily grasp the discipline being taught.
These are otherwise called prolegomena, prodigmata, protheoria, prænuntions, præcognitions, preliminary remarks, etc.
Furthermore, systematic præcognita are general or special. The former are those which communicate in advance about things that commonly pertain to all disciplines: the latter are those which are peculiar to individual disciplines; hence there are as many systematic præcognita as there are disciplines.
In this volume, we have combined general and special præcognita; both because the law of method demanded that general ones be thoroughly and thusly explained at once and simultaneously; and because it would be tedious and useless to repeat many things if their præcognita had to be prefixed to each discipline individually.

III. Preliminary knowledge of disciplines explains two things: the nature and the study of the disciplines.
The main division of the Encyclopaedia is that which is completed by preliminary knowledge and systematics.
Preliminary knowledge is nothing but a diligent preparation which precedes the nature and study of the disciplines.
For more cannot be said in advance about the disciplines.
Therefore, one can compare Præcognita with the alphabet; systematics with the digests, as they are called, or with the volumes themselves.

IV. Preliminary knowledge of disciplines relates to systematics as a vestibule to a house.
For Zabarella, preliminary knowledge is both directive and active.
The former is the definition of the name, the latter of the thing.
Both pertain to the substance of the art and faculty.
In truth, however, directive preliminary knowledge is either total or partial.
The former explains the nature and study of the discipline; the latter is the definition of the name.
The prior is not about the essence of the discipline but is a preparation of the learner.
But it is objected that the nature of a thing is more thoroughly known from its definition; and therefore the nature of the discipline should be conveyed in the preliminary knowledge.
For definition pertains to the essence of each art.
But the response is straightforward. Indeed, the nature of the art is either pre-known or known.
It is pre-known from Hexilogy, Technology, and Archelogy: it is known from the definition of the thing.
However, Zabarella considers the definition of the thing as active preliminary knowledge comparatively because, for one who holds the definition of the discipline, it is not so much knowledge that has been acquired but preliminary knowledge: since the knowledge of the discipline turns on this, namely, that we hold all its precepts.

V. Hexilogy must explain the foundations of internal disciplines and their highest kinds; likewise the habitual principles that guide the learner, indeed even the teacher.
Let us consider everything.
First indeed, a discipline is internal or external.
The former is also called habitual and conceived; the latter is called systematic and enunciated.
Internal discipline is an intellectual habit, perfecting a person, making them learned and apt to contemplate or act skillfully.
External discipline is a methodical system of certain precepts about some knowable matter, taught to educate and perfect a person.
Regarding internal disciplines, their foundations are explained by Hexilogy.
These foundations are ordinarily the light of nature and grace.
There they are intelligence, synderesis, and conscience: here, divine faith.
From these sources emanate all that is taught and learned in the disciplines.
Moreover, no discipline proves its own kind, but presupposes it.
Therefore, there must be some institution concerning the highest kinds of disciplines.
This institution is called Hexilogy, as if to say, ἑξηλογία ἑξ ἔτων.
Here the kinds of habitual disciplines are explained: such as wisdom, science, prudence, and art.
The source of wisdom, science, and art is intelligence; as that of prudence is synderesis, conscience.
Finally, the principles that guide the learner are habitual or notional.
The former are the habits themselves, which are principles of actions: the latter are axioms, from which conclusions arise.
The former are explained in Hexilogy; the latter in Archelogy.
Indeed, habitual principles are rightly placed before notional ones; because, since our intellect can operate well or badly, it is necessary to know all those habits by which it is disposed and determined to good or bad action.
Understand here the action of the mind, that is, contemplation; not the action of virtue or moral vice. For in this place, we are not dealing with moral habits but only intellectual ones.
Nor should we heed the Scholastics called Nominales.
They believe that intelligible species are habits that determine and dispose the intellect for operation; and therefore they do not admit these intellectual habits.
But they are deeply mistaken.
For the function of intelligible species is to unite an intelligible object with the intellect as with a faculty or power: this union is the apprehension of the thing itself; which is known to be the first operation of the mind.
But this apprehension is followed by judgment about truth and falsehood; in which consists the second operation of the intellect.
Indeed, this involves a great difficulty.
Therefore, it is necessary that there be certain intellectual habits that adhere to the intellect as to a certain power, and that dispose and determine it for its operation.
Moreover, the intellectual habits are many; namely, nineteen in number.
And we explain each and every one of them here; because we contemplate a Catholic, or universal, Encyclopaedia: in which without a doubt all habits that determine the power of understanding for good or bad action are to be explained.
From this it is clear why we said in the precepts that the necessity of intellectual habits is twofold—from the part of the learner and the discipline.
For in the learner, some imperfection is discerned, which is called indifference.
In the discipline, however, there is the perfection, by which it becomes a habit that removes that indifference.

VI. Intellectual habits originate from four causes: namely, from the grace of God, nature, teaching, and exercise.
In schools, it is commonly taught according to the general opinion of philosophers that three things are required to acquire a habit: impulse, learning, and practice; that is, nature, teaching, and exercise, as seen in Aristotle’s Rhetoric.
Hence it is elegantly said in schools: Nature begins, art directs, use or exercise perfects.
And again: Nature makes one able, art makes one facile, exercise makes one stable or proficient.
And this statement is true for acquired habits (for according to the ordinary course of nature, these three partial causes must converge to produce a perfect habit in a person), but it is not true of innate and infused habits.
For in the case of innate habits, nature suffices; in the case of infused habits, the grace of God beyond nature is required.
So it must be stated that the only cause of acquired habits is nature; for innate and infused habits, the remote cause is teaching and the proximate cause is exercise; for infused habits, the cause is the grace of God.
Here, however, one must be careful not to argue from extraneous ingenious examples.
For it is not logical to say, for instance, that Apollo learned languages in a moment, therefore we too can acquire the knowledge of languages without effort.
To argue thus is to seek a justification for one's own laziness.