CHAPTER XI.

On the Light of Glory.

PRECEPTS.

Up to this point, we have been concerned with the habits of the present life: what remains is the habit of future life, which is called the light of glory.

The light of glory is the habit by which a glorified person is inclined to the beatific vision of God.

Hence, among the Scholastics, it is called the habit in which one is seen; likewise, the elevated habit in the state of the homeland.

The beatific vision of God is that by which the mind of a glorified person knows God face to face, as one who is well-disposed to them for eternity.

RULES.

I. A habit in eternal life is necessary to elicit a continuous act.
The happiness of a person in eternal life is considered in two ways: by reason of the object, and of the form.
In the former way, that happiness is God alone, as the supreme good, for the contemplation of which the blessed are ordered.
In the latter way, happiness is a certain good created by God, which does not fulfill human desire except because of that object.
For since happiness, considered in this way, is the perfection of the blessed, and the perfection of no creature can be infinite, this good must be created and finite: since God is not the form or matter of any created thing, but only the efficient cause and end.
From this, it is clear that eternal happiness considered formally is neither pure act (for this belongs to God alone) nor habit simply; since it indicates a perfection which is placed in act.
And therefore, it is to be conceived as a habit in continuous act, such as knowledge occupied in perpetual contemplation.
Nor should it truly seem absurd if a hyperphysical thing is somehow placed in two categories, in quality and in action: since the aggregation of all goods is not limited to one genus: nor is this even so unusual in purely physical things; in the way that a figure denotes nothing other than the disposition of quality in quantity; more so than that, but less so than this.
And thus also, happiness is κυριώτερον more in quality than in action.

II. The beatific vision of God is both theoretical and practical.
Indeed, that act or habit, of which we speak, belongs to all faculties.
Therefore, τὸ ἡμέτερον, which now believes, will then see clearly: τὸ ὑμέτερον, which hopes here, will firmly obtain that for which it strove: τὸ ἐμὸν ἡμέτερον, which loves, will then love perfectly.
Hence, perfect vision, perfect love, and perfect enjoyment.
Thus, that vision is not only theoretical but also practical.
But why, someone might ask, is that supreme happiness placed in vision rather than in the enjoyment of God?
The answer is because, as in all things, so too in this happiness, the principal parts are of the intellect.
For Christ defines eternal life by the knowledge of God, John 17:3.
And the apostles in John 14:8 ask for the Father to be shown to them, and they say that it suffices for them?
And truly, that vision of the Father partly includes, partly draws with it, all other perfection which can befall a person dwelling in the state of the homeland.