CHAPTER IX.

On infused habits; namely supernatural faith, prophetic light, and the gift of miracles and tongues.

PRECEPTS.

An infused intellectual habit follows; which is ordinary, as divine or supernatural faith; or extraordinary, as prophetic light, and also the gift of miracles and tongues.

Divine faith is a light supernaturally kindled in the mind, by which a person is inclined to firmly assent to divine testimony.

Prophetic light is that by which the mind is imbued, so that it can foresee and predict future things, which only God reveals.

The gift of miracles is a habit by which a person is inclined to perceive and accomplish things that surpass the powers of all creatures.

The gift of tongues is a habit by which a person is inclined to use languages not learned in the ordinary way.

RULES.

I. Supernatural faith, whether general and historical or special and saving, formally has its seat in the intellect. 
The reason for the first assertion is that historical faith is a firm assent whereby a person agrees to all things that are delivered by the word of God. 
The reason for the second assertion is that saving or justifying faith is a firm assent whereby a person agrees to the promises of the gospel in such a way that he not only believes them to be true but also considers them to pertain to himself specifically. 
Thus he judges that these promises are made to him, that is, he awards and appropriates them to himself, as it is said. 
Therefore, there are two parts of justifying faith, namely 1. the knowledge of God's promises in Christ. 2. and firm assent, whereby a person firmly believes these promises pertain to himself. 
The subject of both this knowledge and assent is the intellect: as the Apostle himself testifies in Hebrews 11. 3: By faith we understand the worlds were framed. 
From this assent arises confidence, by which the mind, laying aside fear, rests in the love of God. 
This confidence, indeed, is in the will, as it is nothing other than strengthened hope, which has dispelled fear. 
Since it is not reasonable for one and the same quality to be in two subjects, nor can one and the same virtue be the perfection of both intellect and will, nor can two virtues differing in species unite into one, we consider faith to be one thing, and confidence to be another, with the latter being the inseparable fruit and effect of the former, as the Apostle teaches in Ephesians 3. 12 and 1 Timothy 3. 13. 
For as soon as the mind, with firm assent, believes the promises of the Gospel pertain to itself, immediately fears are extinguished, and pleasure is composed in calm peace, and is filled with solid joy, through which the mind, full of confidence, as dictated by the spirit of adoption, addresses God intimately and with much freedom. 
This is further evidenced by the nature of opposites. 
For if confidence were a part of faith, hesitation, the opposite of confidence, would be a part of unbelief. 
For just as faith is opposed to doubt, so is confidence opposed to hesitation. 
If faith and confidence were one virtue, they would have one opposite. 
Finally, just as believing is different from trusting, so faith is different from confidence. 
But these are so related and so mutually contained by the bond of necessity that just as fire ceases to be fire when heat is removed, so faith, when confidence is removed, is not faith but doubt. 
Hence, among Latin authors, to believe is sometimes taken to mean to trust, as in Virgil’s Eclogue 3: "The bank is not trusted." And in Eclogue 2: "Do not trust too much in appearance." 
Nor indeed is anything detracted from the dignity of faith if we say that confidence is an effect that necessarily follows faith because this is how Scripture speaks, and the nature of faith is better explained in this way than if confidence is said to be a part of faith. 
It does not contradict this that Scripture places faith in the heart in Romans 10. 10, Acts 8. 37, and elsewhere. 
For it is understood in Scripture, according to Hebrew custom, to mean the mind and seat of thoughts by the heart, as in Matthew 9. 4, chapter 15. 19, Psalm 14. 1. 
Furthermore, justifying faith is not a theoretical intellectual habit but practical, because it is ὁμόνοιας (agreement) in the mind, yet παρρησίας (boldness) in the will.

II. Extraordinary infused habits are either purely intellectual, purely moral, or mixed.  
The first class includes prophetic light, the gift of tongues, and similar ones.  
These can indeed fall equally on both the reprobate and the elect.  
The second class includes hope and charity.  
These are indeed proper to believers.  
The third class is the gift of miracles.  
This is a habit partly of the mind, seeing and understanding that God will certainly do this or that through us, and partly of the will, inclined to the prompt execution of the miracle.  
Thus, similar to how these habits are classified.  
Some are theoretical, like prophetic light; others are practical, like the gift of miracles; others are poetic, like the gift of tongues.  
On these habits, one should read the Apostle in 1 Corinthians 12 and 14.