ENCYCLOPEDIA  
BOOK THREE  
PRESENTING  
ARCHEOLOGY, that is, the Doctrine of the principles of disciplines.

CHAPTER ONE.

On the purpose of disciplines.

PRECEPTS.

The variety of disciplines is thus learned from two preconceived notions, Hexitogia and Technologia: their stability is sought from the third preconceived notion, which is called Archeology.

Archeology is the third of the four preconceived notions of disciplines, concerning their principles.

It is both general and special.

General Archeology pursues principles common to all disciplines.

The principles of disciplines are causes, by which those are.

And they are others of essence, others of cognition. They are commonly called the principles of being and knowing.

The principles of essence are external and internal causes of disciplines. There are the end and the efficient; here are the matter and the form.

The end of disciplines is either per se, or per accidens.

The end per se is that which is almost internal to disciplines; or, to which disciplines are essentially referred.

It is both absolute and related.

The absolute end is what disciplines have when considered in themselves.

It is both general and special.

The general end is that which disciplines have in common with other things.

It is principal and architectonic, the glory of GOD; or subordinate, such as the eternal salvation of man and the restoration of the image of GOD.

The special end is that which reciprocates with disciplines: as is the knowledge proposed to the learner.

The related end is that which disciplines have in relation to each other: such as the use of knowledge.

The accidental end is that to which disciplines are ordered accidentally: such as honor, glory, wealth, friends, authority, etc.

RULES.

I. Archeology presents the principles of disciplines, insofar as the foreknowledge of them is necessary.

Archaeology is the λόγος περί ἀρχαίων, that is, the history of ancient things.  
But ἀρχέλογία (a word coined by analogy) is the λόγος περί τῶν ἀρχῶν, that is, the doctrine of principles, and indeed of the principles of disciplines, insofar as it is necessary for them to be known beforehand.  
For it is entirely relevant that some general instruction on principles precedes all disciplines, because they have many things in common in this chapter of doctrine.

II. The end of disciplines per se must be accurately distinguished from the accidental end.

For if those accidental ends, which we have recited, become primary for someone, or are viewed as principal, that person becomes not so much learned as a sophist. 
For, as Aristotle warned in 2 Elench., the sophist only wants to seem learned for the sake of profit or ambition: but the true seeker of learning desires to be wise in reality; yet does not disdain if those external things come. 
Galen frequently complained that most doctors of his era, neglecting careful knowledge of the art of medicine, sought only honors and wealth. 
Pliny also reproached his century more than once, claiming that only profitable arts were cultivated. 
Thus, each condemns those who learn more for these accidental ends rather than for ends per se. 
On this matter, there is a notable passage by Giovanni Francesco Pico della Mirandola in Book 2 of "On the Study of Divine and Human Philosophy." 
"They go astray," he says, "who use learning as merchandise to gather wealth and make the study of wisdom a mercenary pursuit. 
For they improperly direct the internal good to the external, the noble to the ignobler. 
This age is so infected by this type of people that there are some who cannot be convinced that anyone might pursue literary studies for anything other than the desire for profit."

III. The measure of all disciplines, universal and principal, must be the glory of God and our eternal salvation.

That same Pico, whom we just cited, states elegantly in the aforementioned book, chapter 4: "Now we must address the ends of philosophizing per se. 
In my judgment, a man can direct his knowledge of literature, already possessed or sought, towards God, his neighbor, and himself. 
In himself, moreover, it can be directed in three ways: towards enduring goods of the mind, so that he may know; towards apparent goods, to capture glory; or towards external goods, to accumulate money and riches. 
And in chapter 5, it is not difficult to show that all are mistaken except those who direct their knowledge to God. 
For just as natural effects, if not supported by their causes, are deprived of their proper power when they lose the influence by which they are sustained, enhanced, and preserved by the same causes: so the soul, which depends on God not only for becoming but also for being (to use the words of our theologians), if it does not abide in Him, indeed, to the extent that nature's capacity allows, strives to assimilate itself, frustrates its own work. 
For it must always tend to Him both in knowledge and love if it desires to attain rest. 
Therefore, Augustine said that God made us for Himself and our heart is restless until it rests in Him. 
But this rest pertains not only to the intellect but to the very will, with which we are united to Him through love. 
For if the perfection of the effect consists in the assimilation to the cause: since the creature was produced by infinite love of God: it follows that the soul must tend towards Him in love if it wishes to be granted peace and beatitude. 
Therefore, knowledge per se lacking love is so far from being able to settle and pacify our soul that it is the cause of its constant agitation and tumult: all the more so, as our intellect is so weak that it knows almost nothing in comparison to those things it wishes to know. Thus far Pico. 
From these things, it is clearer than midday light that God, or His glory, must be the ultimate σκοπὸν ἀπώτατον of all disciplines, or the ultimate end, as the schools say. 
For thus all our actions are perfected; indeed, we ourselves, who act, are perfected in mind and body, in this life and in the future.

IV. The proximate end of disciplines is the generation of knowledge of a matter in the learner; the remote end is the use of knowledge.

The proximate end is said to be that which we first aim to achieve; the remote end is that to which the proximate is referred. 
The proximate end of disciplines is the knowledge of beings, or πολυμάθεια (much learning). 
For the knowledge proposed concerns either philology, philosophy, faculties that follow philosophy, mechanical arts, or ultimately all of these, or certainly more of them. 
To these five kinds, we refer the infinite multitude of knowledge which is proposed to one who wishes to become and be called πανεπιστήμων or πάνσοφος (all-knowing or all-wise), as they say. 
For one must be versed in these five kinds of knowledge to be regarded, as it were, as omniscient. 
The remote end of disciplines is the use of knowledge. 
For knowledge is referred to the various uses and benefits that it brings. 
The use of knowledge is either in teaching perceived matters, persuading on matters to be done, performing honest actions, or finally accomplishing matters necessary, useful, or delightful for human life. 
To these four ends, the knowledge we have acquired through learning can be referred and reduced. 
First of all, knowledge is referred to teaching perceived matters.
For, as Ambrose says in Book 1 of "On Duties," many learn to teach what they have perceived. 
For it is praiseworthy to teach what you have learned and to share knowledge with others. 
And to this end, school teachers direct their knowledge. 
We teach either by the spoken word or by writing down what is worthy of knowledge. 
Then, knowledge can be referred to persuading on matters to be done or believed, which concerns orators whether ecclesiastical or secular. 
Thirdly, knowledge is referred to performing honest actions. 
Honest action is referred to either θεοσέβειαν, that is, divine worship, which the practical theologian regards; or to shaping morals, which is the task of the moral philosopher; or to preserving the state, which pertains to the politician; or to prudently managing the household, which is the task of the head of the family. 
Fourthly, knowledge is referred to the acquisition or affection of those things that are necessary, useful, or even delightful for living life; this concerns all arts, liberal and non-liberal. 
For among these arts, some are necessary for living life, others are useful, others only delightful.

V. All disciplines in their way contribute to the restoration of the image of God in man.

For the image of God is chiefly placed in wisdom and justice, or in the soundness of the intellect and the sanctity of the will. 
Now it is the aim of all disciplines to promote one or the other in us. 
Therefore, each in its way restores the collapsed image of God in us.