CHAPTER II.  
On the efficient cause of disciplines.  

PRECEPTS.

The efficient cause of disciplines is primary or secondary.  

The primary is God, who communicated His image to man, and restores it within us when it is fallen.  

The secondary efficient is principal, or less principal.  

The principal is remote or proximate.  

The remote cause is partly the senses, partly right reason, or the light of nature.  

The proximate cause is observation of the senses, experience, and induction.  

The less principal is impelling, or instrumental.  

The impelling cause is internal or external.  
The former is called insight, the latter is called cooperation.  

The internal impelling is partly the deficiency and need of human nature, partly the natural desire for knowledge, which is inherent in all humans.  

The external impelling is the excellence, beauty, and faculty proper to those things which we engage with.  

The instrumental cause consists of living and silent teachers, patrons, the goods of the body and of fortune, finally a convenient place and time.  

RULES.

I. The supreme cause of disciplines is God, inspiring the soul of man.

The principle of all good in nature and beyond nature is God, the highest good, and the Father of lights, from whom every good gift descends, as the Apostle teaches, James 1.  
Therefore, since all disciplines are good, and indeed exceedingly so (as they are the offspring or daughters of wisdom, and mothers or teachers), they can have no other author than God, who is wisdom itself and therefore the source, measure, and rule of all wisdom.

II. The parents and pillars of all disciplines are sense, observation, experience, and induction.

Would that these four words were written in golden letters, in ample and illustrious form, over the doors of all schools, or rather inscribed with firm and stable understanding and memory in the minds of teachers and students: perception, observation, experience, and induction, so that as often as they read and remember them, they would read and remember the cause and origin of all true doctrines; which would demonstrate the true origin of each precept and rule, and declare their certain use.  
From these, sense first performs its duty in man; and it does so such that it possesses the power of knowledge, as Aristotle says in 3 de gener. anim. c. 10.  
Thus, the knowledge that proceeds from a rightly functioning sense is truly certain.  
Among the senses, sight and hearing are the foremost; by these most exquisite senses, man perceives the differences of various things.  
Hence, these senses are said to reason. But because it is not enough to sense unless we observe what we sense, observation follows in the second place, which is a collection of multiple senses or rather sensations.  
This is followed by experience, which is a collection of multiple observations and their application to certain use.  
Finally, the collection of multiple experiences is induction; which, together with experience, is the proximate generator of disciplines: as they consist of universal precepts collected by induction, whom it requires.

III. The awareness of human weakness and an innate desire for knowledge drive undistorted natures to learn.

There are certain Cyclopean minds that disregard humanity and honesty.  
On the other hand, there are certain heroic minds that pursue remarkable things with a peculiar divine inspiration.  
Finally, there are certain stable minds, as they are called, which are moderately good.  
The former cannot in any way be driven to liberal knowledge; the latter and the others are impelled in two ways.  
First, the more ingenious people are, the more they feel the deficiencies of human nature, and thus they are seized with a burning desire to seek remedies for this ailment.  
To this pertains that saying of Aristotle, 7 Politics at the end, "Every art and discipline wishes to fulfill that which is lacking in nature."  
Then, as are the words of the orator in 3 De finibus, such is the innate love of knowledge in all humans that no one can doubt that human nature is drawn to it without any enticement of profit.  
On this desire for knowledge, the philosopher in 1 Metaphysics says: "All humans naturally desire to know."  
Moreover, man seeks knowledge with a dual appetite, innate and elicited.  
Understand man as considered in the species or right nature: not in the depraved individual.  
To that elicited appetite pertains the external impelling cause; namely, the beauty and effectiveness of marvelous things in the world: which creates admiration, and this brings about the pursuit of knowledge.  
Hence Aristotle in 1 Metaphysics c. 2 says: "Because of admiration, humans both now and in ancient times began to philosophize."  
Plato teaches the same in Theaetetus.  
Indeed, admiration is as if it is the origin of philosophy.  
For since ignorance of causes breeds admiration, and truly excellent minds do not wish to be suspended, nor can they endure the ignorance and sorrow arising from the ignorance of causes, they are necessarily moved to investigate the causes of things, and therefore to establish or learn philosophy, which is the teacher of causes, and thus eliminates ignorance.  
For this reason, when Pythagoras was asked what is the end of philosophy, he replied, "To admire nothing."  
Horace expressed Pythagoras' sentiment thus:  
    "To admire nothing is almost the one  
    And only thing, Numicius, that can make and keep one happy."

IV. The instruments of philosophy are commonly said to be natural, habitual, personal, and real.

Natural are sense, observation, experience, and induction: as mentioned shortly before.  
Habitual are attention, reading, selection, and practice.  
Personal are mute teachers, or authors, and living teachers, or instructors.  
Real are instrumental arts and the goods of the body and fortune, insofar as they are instruments of intellectual and moral virtue.