CHAPTER III.  
On the matter of disciplines.

PRECEPTS.

There will be external causes of disciplines: internal ones follow, matter and form.

The matter of disciplines is either remote or proximate.

Remote is partly the term, partly precept and rule, partly commentary, in which there are distinctions and questions.

Proximate is the methodical system of precepts and rules.

RULES.

I. The matter of disciplines is partly sensible, partly intelligible.

Sensible; insofar as disciplines are considered as systems. 
Thus they come into view and have quantitative parts apparent to the senses. 
Intelligible; insofar as disciplines are considered as habits of the mind.

II. The matter of disciplines is diverse, but not adverse.

Since the Encyclopedia is among those things which are called aggregates, it is necessary that its matter be varied and diverse: which is seen in the world, church, and school. 
But because it is not a random and accidental occurrence, as they say, like a heap of stones among which wood and other heterogeneous things are mixed, but ordered and accurate, so that diverse parts do not destroy each other, but conspire harmoniously.

III. The matter of disciplines is completed by precepts and rules.

Precepts are the definitions and distributions themselves. 
Rules are partly theorems about things to be known, partly canons about things to be done, if we wish to speak accurately. 
Nor should you say that precepts are also rules, and vice versa. 
For thus you take each term broadly. 
Nor should you say that definitions and distributions suffice. 
For although rules can be derived from definitions and distributions, since they are virtually inherent in them, this does not prevent rules from being distinctly proposed. 
For if we wish to consider virtual containment, as they say, the definition of any thing, such as art or science, encompasses the entire nature of the thing: hence the definition is called the sun, eye, foundation, and periphery of any discussion: yet one does not immediately grasp the entire nature of the thing who has its definition. 
For distribution and definitions of the parts of the distribution are added. 
On which matter you may see Didactics and Logic. 
But what is to be established concerning commentaries? 
They contain the declaration and demonstration of precepts and rules: and thus are nothing other than extended precepts and rules.