CHAPTER IV.

On the form of disciplines.

PRECEPTS.

The form of disciplines is their union and connection in certain principles, object, and end.

This form is viewed either absolutely or relatively to our knowledge.

Absolutely viewed, the form is that perfect union which is not completely known to us, however it is sketched out in the methodical arrangement of the disciplines.

Relatively, that union and connection vary according to the various degrees present in different individuals.

RULES.

I. The accurate order of disciplines is to be attributed to necessary things, not to arbitrary and contingent ones.

Order is twofold, necessary and arbitrary. 
The former depends on the nature of things themselves; the latter depends on our own prudence.
The order, which is the form of disciplines, does not depend on our whim. 
For even if a person arranges disciplines in various ways, as this or that arrangement and connection seems better to them, the discipline considered in the idea does not depend on our whim.
I want to note those who regard the method of disciplines as some sort of wax, which can be molded in all directions. 
Indeed this is true, that the order of disciplines is varied among different people.
But what does this have to do with the essence of disciplines? 
It is necessary, therefore, that we remember this: that certain parts of the disciplines are supreme by their own nature, which by no human effort can be made not supreme, that is, middle or lower, and vice versa.
Just as disciplines are thus cut from things; and thus the foundation of the order which exists among disciplines must be sought in the nature of things themselves.

II. Different disciplines are united among themselves by a triple bond quite like sisterhood.

The first bond is of common principles.
There are common notions given, on which, as on hinges, all disciplines depend.
The second is the bond of one object, namely intellect and will: likewise of the true and the good.
For the intellect and will are the principal subjects of information: the true and the good are the common subjects of treatment.
The third is the bond of the end, which is the perfection of man.
Due to this very close connection, it happens that disciplines hand over mutual works to each other.
And this is that Homeric chain, in which one link takes up another, so that if you pull one, all immediately follow; if you remove one, the whole chain is dissolved.
Finally, this union brings it about, that the Encyclopaedia becomes a true hermathena.