CHAPTER V.  
On the Properties of the Principles of Knowledge.

PRECEPTS.

Up to this point about the principles of the essence of the disciplines: now about the principles of knowledge, from which the conclusions of the disciplines are derived.

The principles of knowledge are considered here regarding properties, norm, and general divisions.

The properties of the principles of knowledge are four in number: truth, necessity, clarity, and ease.

Truth is that by which principles are true in themselves, indeed to such an extent that the truth of other things can be gathered from them.

Necessity is that by which principles are so true that they generate knowledge.

Clarity is that by which principles are more known than conclusions, and indeed first and immediately.

Ease is that by which principles can be most easily known and cause other things to be easily known.

RULES.

I. Principles of being can also be principles of knowing, but not vice versa.

For the principle of why a thing is, is also the principle of why a thing is known: because the knowledge of a thing must be proportionate to its essence.  
But the principle of why a thing is known is not immediately the principle of why a thing is: because the essence of a thing does not depend on our understanding.

II. Principles of knowing are small in size, but greatest in power.

For they are like seeds, in which the things themselves are virtually contained.  
Therefore, just as a tiny seed can grow into a tree, so can a minimal principle be extremely fruitful with infinite conclusions.  
Thus, let us value the principles of knowing greatly, and not judge them by quantity, but by their power.  
An old proverb instructs: "The beginning is half of everything."  
Plato adds, "A greatest treasure is from small contributions."  
Others, as Galen testifies in "On Medical Doctrines" 9.1, said the principle is "more in potentiality."

III. Principles primarily so called must be true.

Principles primarily said, or κυρίως, are those that are principles by their nature, not by convention.  
Such principles must be true.  
For that by which we know things to be true must be the truest, according to the whole notion: "That on account of which each thing is such, is more such."  
And from the false, the true is not concluded by itself.  
Hence it is rightly said: Principles are joined by a connective, meaning they are linked together with an adamantine bond, whether they are natural or supernatural, theoretical or practical.  
From which furthermore it follows that principles are not contrary to each other.  
Therefore, whatever is true in one faculty cannot be false in another.  
They are grievously mistaken, therefore, who always have on their lips: "This is true philosophically, but false theologically."  
Also: "This follows through philosophy, is destroyed through theology."  
Indeed, it is true that many articles of faith, which Scaliger eruditely calls pivots of our religion, are against corrupt and distorted reason: but what does this accident pertain to the nature and essence of the thing itself?

IV. Principles primarily called must be necessary.

For principles must be constituted in such a way as to generate the knowledge of the conclusion, as they call it, that is, an unchanging habit, which is called ἀμετάπτωτος ἐπιστήμη in Greek; not however a pendulous assent, which is opinion.  
Now truly, knowledge is of necessary things, opinion of contingent things.  
Therefore, whatever is contingent cannot generate knowledge.

V. Principles primarily called must be prior and more known than the conclusion, and the causes for why the conclusion is and is known, and these must be immediate or first, and closest in their kind.  
Accordingly, principles are also easy.

Principles are rightly called the seeds of conclusions, as well as measures of conclusions, and indeed those measuring or active, that is, such that they measure their own conclusions and are not measured by them.  
For principles must bring light to the conclusion and be constituted in such a way that doctrines can plainly be deduced from them.  
Therefore, it is necessary that they are prior and more known than the conclusion.  
Hence, it is said: Principles are known.  
Also: Principles are confessed.  
Therefore, those things which are uncertain, unknown, ungranted, and controversial, and not common to both dissenting parties, are not as yet said to be principles.  
Thus, it is rightly said: It is required for disputants to agree on certain principles.  
Furthermore, if there are others in the middle between principles and conclusion, these should rather, as being prior, be considered as principles.  
However, principles cannot be led ad infinitum; instead, we must stop at some first point above which we do not ascend.  
Moreover, principles must be first in their kind, but not absolutely.  
Degrees of priority are indeed granted between principles, such that the same things are both principles and doctrines or conclusions and as if after principles: as indeed the same things infer at times, at other times are inferred from others.  
And these are the four properties or requirements of principles, which others multiply, and say principles must be true, immediate, prior, more known, and the causes of all doctrines.