CHAPTER VI.  
On the norm of the principles of knowledge.

PRECEPTS.

The norm of the principles of knowledge is threefold: Holy Scripture, Right reason, & Experience.

Otherwise called original principles of knowing.

Holy Scripture is the principle of knowing divine matters.

Right reason is the principle of knowing, so to speak, demonstrative matters.

Experience is the principle of knowing contingent matters.

RULES.

1. The certainty of principles is discerned in three ways: namely, by the light of Scripture, Nature, and Experience.

The principle of knowing is the correct rule of all cognition: and certainly not a Lesbian rule, but a Polycletean one, like the balance of Critolaus.
Therefore, the principle of cognition must be certain.
That certainty is discerned by three modes and criteria.
First, the knowledge of principles is the light divinely revealed and expressed in Scripture, or impressed on human minds.
I say divinely: because principles given to us in time are informed according to that eternal principle in the mind of God, which is an immutable concept, and the form of reason in God, the prince of universality, existing before all times.
This, therefore, is the supreme principle and the chief rule of principles, that divine law, I say, from eternity and to eternity.
Which it is necessary to note well against those who think truth and honesty are mere opinion.
For these three principles; eternal in the mind of God, revealed in Scripture, and implanted in our minds: these, I say, are in some way one; since there is one eternal reason, which imparts a natural and infuses a divine law.
Furthermore, to the pattern of that eternal law, the principle by which we know all things is conformed in time.
That principle is the light of grace and nature.
This is implanted in us, as in angels, and therefore in creatures endowed with reason, and it informs them with notions of common nature, by some participation shading that eternal principle: that is, the light of grace, which comes upon or is added to our corrupted nature, and does not destroy it, but perfects it.
By the benefit of this double light, we perceive the truth and necessity of principles or of primary notions.
For, just as persons who are not blind see this sun, and when they see it, necessarily see the light; so all sane persons, by the light of nature, which God kindles in the nature of humans, see honesty as something to be desired, dishonesty as something to be avoided; whoever denies this may be considered irrational, and more foolish than Anaxagoras, who argued that snow is black, against the consciousness and universal experience of all people.
And here pertains that human thing: Against one who denies the principles, there can be no dispute.
Also: One who denies principles is not to be listened to.
Where you hold that those first principles are immediately known if the terms are explained: for example, if it is explained what is whole, and what is part, immediately the intellect judges that the whole is greater than its part.
As in reality, natural principles are discerned by the light of nature: so are supernatural principles discerned by the light of grace or faith.
Therefore, it is not surprising that a Turk or another unbeliever does not admit those principles, that God is one and triune, Christ is God and man in one person, and the like.
For just as it cannot happen that a blind person sees the sun: so it cannot happen that an unbeliever sees the Sun of justice.
And this is what the Scholastics rightly say: The first principles are known by the light of superior knowledge.
Where by superior knowledge it is necessary to understand these three; the light of faith, the light of nature, and philosophical discipline superior, which proves the principles of the inferior.
Thus, this principle: Scripture is the word of God: is known by the light of that supreme knowledge, which the Holy Spirit produces in us.
This principle: The whole is greater than its part: is known by the light of superior or prior knowledge, which we call the light of nature.
But the principles of Music and Optics are known by the light of superior discipline: Music indeed from Arithmetic, Optics from Geometry.
And this is the greatest certainty of principles, of which Basil in Ps.115 says: Man is not to be questioned in the face of those witnessing on the principles: It is necessary that the principles of any discipline are so certain to learners that they ought not to be called into question.
Certainly, just as light is placed in the eyes to discern bodily matters: so the light of principles is impressed in the mind, or, it comes supernaturally by singular grace.
Therefore, principles are called self-evident, and we assent to them without any confirmation.
Therefore, if this double light were extinguished, the destruction of nature and the church would follow.
To this light, which is often called the intellect of the principles, is added the light or intellect of order in syllogism, which Melanchthon makes according to confirmation.
By the benefit of this light, the certainty of principles is shown partly by the collation of contradictions, partly by the opposition of contrary effects.
For all sane persons understand that two contradictory things cannot both be true at the same time.
Thus contradictory statements are: Honest things are to be sought, Honest things are not to be sought.
Who is so foolish as to say that both statements are true?
Therefore, if this is true, Honest things are to be sought, it will certainly be false to contradict that, Honest things are not to be sought.
Then the collation of contrary effects convincingly certifies the principles.
For it is put beyond all controversy, that things which preserve nature require nature; and those which are inimical to nature, oppose it.
For what seeks its own destruction?
What does not rather exert itself with all its might to preserve itself?
Therefore, since honest and just things preserve nature, and contrary things destroy it: it follows that honest and just things are according to nature, while dishonest and unjust things are against nature.
Therefore, those are to be sought with nature as a guide: whereas those equally shown are to be rejected.
And here is the intellect of order or consequence in syllogism, which provides a demonstration from the posterior, or reduction to the impossible.
For by these two methods the principles, even the first ones, can be proven.
But this light of order is rightly added to the light of nature, so that the light of grace is first in Scripture, second, the light of nature; to which is now added the third, namely, experience, and indeed both supernatural in the elect and in men as far as they are human: and both partly universal, which is of all, either Christians or people; partly particular, which is of certain Christians or people.
Thus universal experience in a human, as such is, behaves so that all sane persons judge in the same way about those matters perceived by sense: such as fire being hot, woman giving birth, different being life, different death, wine and pepper having heating power.
Therefore, the sane acquiesce in measures in those things, which are observed by universal experience and are not to be contradicted.
For to dissent from manifest experience is to wage war against God, in the manner of giants: for it is just as if someone would deny that this order of nature is established by God.
What madness it is to feign uncertainty as to whether a woman gives birth or a man?
Likewise, with Anaxagoras asserting that snow is black.
If such Cyclopean and monstrous natures occur, which deny manifest things, for instance, fire heating, they must be tormented by fire until they confess that fire heats.
But just as in nature there is given universal experience: so also in the church, where all and each of the elect experience, that faith is our victory, the grace of God is daily new, and the church cannot be destroyed in this world.
But besides universal experience, there is given particular experience, which is of a few, and often also singular, which pertains to one only.
Thus certain people, for example, Brazilians, experience wood, which is said by their land to be Brazilian, growing in this way at this time: and certain elect people experience greater spiritual joy in their hearts, than others do.
Again, some individual man, who is in Germany transfers himself to America, experiences something singular, which others have not experienced: and one individual elect person, for instance, Paul the Apostle, experiences singular revelations of the Holy Spirit.
But here is placed the need for caution, lest we immediately test or condemn particular and singular experiences.
And these are the three proofs of principles, Scripture, Nature or the light of nature, and Experience.
Therefore, new principles beyond Scripture, nature, and experience are not to be invented.
And, care must always be taken that in every debate we turn back to these principles, and in them lay a foundation indeed as to principles naturally known we prove something to all: from divine oracles among the faithful, who at least embrace the external confession of the Word of God.

II. Holy Scripture can be a principle of philosophy, even if it is not a philosophical principle.

The reason is that philosophical principles can and should agree with the light of faith, as with a most divine rule.  
Although Scripture is not part of philosophy, it can nonetheless be its norm.  
Nature or right reason can also be a principle in theology, but not simply.  
It cannot be a principle and norm of believing: because it acts on nothing beyond its own powers and species.  
However, it can be a norm and principle of knowing; as theology encompasses many natural theorems, such as that God exists and should be worshiped: likewise mixed theorems and problems, in which the subject or predicate is borrowed from philosophy, as when it is asked whether the decrees of God argue some composition in His essence?  
Although these principles, Scripture and Nature, render mutual services to each other, the seats, bounds, and families of them must not be confused, lest there be a transgression into another field, which is considered a flaw in philosophy.  
Thus purely supernatural things are not to be measured by the rules of nature; because although they are not against nature, they are nonetheless above it.  
It is unseemly for what is far inferior to set the standard for the superior.

III. Scripture, right reason, and experience are principles, and norms of principles.

The principle of knowing is original, or habitual.  
That is the principle by which something is known: this is the principle that is known.  
Holy Scripture, right reason, and experience are original principles of knowing: first axioms are the habitual principles of knowing.  
These norms and rules are those three original principles, so called because they are the fountains of the other principles.