CHAPTER VII.  
General Divisions of Principles.

PRECEPTS.

The divisions of principles follow, general or common, fourteen in number, in this order.

I. Principles are simple or complex.  
Simple principles are the first terms of disciplines, insofar as they are considered outside of arrangement: e.g. being, essence, good, virtue, justice.  
Complex principles are axioms from which conclusions are deduced: as, What you do not wish to be done to you, do not do to another.  

II. Principles of cognition are such by themselves, or by accident.  
The former are called principles primarily, the latter secondarily.  
Principles by themselves are those which by their own force and nature are related to the principle or conclusion: as, It is impossible for the same thing to be and not to be.  
Principles by accident are those which are referred to the conclusion with a certain extrinsic and accidental respect: such as those which are called postulates.  

III. Principles are natural or supernatural.  
Natural principles depend on the light of right reason: or on the law of divine creation and governance: as, The whole is greater than any part of itself.  

Supernatural principles depend on the general revelation of God: as, Christ is our savior by merit and efficacy.  

IV. Principles are immediate or mediate.  
Immediate are those which have no other medium or principle by which they can be demonstrated a priori: as, God is.

Mediate are those which can be demonstrated from the principles of a higher science: as, Optical principles are demonstrated from geometrical principles.  
These can be called post-principles.

V. Principles are innate, acquired, or infused.  
Innate are those which man knows by the force of the intellect acting within him: as, Every whole is greater than its part.  
These are elegantly called by Scaliger zopyra: by others, the seeds of eternity.

Acquired are those which man learns by his own study: indeed either by instruction: as, Every circle consists of 360 degrees or parts. or by experience, as, Fish in certain places are black.

Infused are those which God inspires.

VI. Principles are common or proper.  
Common principles are those whose use many disciplines claim for themselves: such as the principles of Metaphysics and Logic.

Proper principles are those whose use pertains to only one discipline: such as the principles of Physics.

VII. Principles are real or notional.  
Real principles are those which are founded immediately in the thing itself; and are otherwise called protonoematic: such as the principles of Physics.

Notional principles are those which are founded on the comparison of things; and are otherwise called deuteronoematic principles: such as the principles of Logic and some Astronomical principles.

VIII. Principles are either most known in themselves, or most known to us.  
Most known in themselves are those which are most certain by their nature: such as, God is.

Most known to us are those which are most certain with respect to us: such as, The sun shines.  
For this is known by the senses.

IX. Principles are most general or subordinate.  

Most general principles are those which are principles in such a way that they are not conclusions.  
Such are either absolutely: as is this one, It is impossible for the same thing to be and not to be: or in a certain respect; in which sense, every discipline has some most general principle.  
Thus in Arithmetic, the most general principle is: Unity is the root and measure of every number.

Subordinate principles are those which are principles in such a way that they are also conclusions.

X. Principles are either truly and in themselves principles, or by convention.  
Principles which are truly and in themselves principles are most worthy: hence they are also called dignities, likewise truths.  
These two terms are very commonly used by Scholastics.

Principles by convention are those which are supposed for the sake of disputing or teaching: such as hypotheses.  
To this pertains the division of principles into counter-suppositions and hypotheses.

XI. Principles are natural (φυσικά) or positive (θετικά). Arist. 1. Posterior Analytics, towards the end.

Natural (φυσικά) principles are those to which the human intellect assents by native propriety without lengthy explanation: such as, The whole is greater than its part, Parents are to be honored.  
Aristotle calls these innate powers (δυναμεις συμφυτας).  
Damascenus from ancient philosophers calls them common notions (κοιναὶ ἔννοιαι).  
Others call them natural apprehensions (καταληπτικαὶ φυσικαὶ).  
The Stoics call them preconceptions, anticipations, and natural inclinations.

Positive (θετικά) principles are those either revealed by God or established in disciplines to make known and prove their conclusions.  
Aristotle calls these theses, just as he calls natural principles demands (αἰτήματα).  
Sturm elegantly calls axioms honorary declarations.

Positive principles include definitions, hypotheses, and postulates.

Definitions are those which explain a thing by genus and differentia: such as, Man is a rational animal.

Hypotheses are those, which although they have a demonstration, are assumed without demonstration: otherwise called conceded propositions: such as, All angles opposite by a cross are equal.

Postulates, called demands (αἰτήματα) by the Greeks, are propositions upon which the practitioner makes some agreement with the auditor: such as, To describe a circle with any center and interval.  
Otherwise called requests.

XII. Principles are primitive or derivative.  
The former are simply first; the latter are not.

XIII. Principles are confessed or doubtful.  
The former shine with their own light; the latter have light but do not show it at first glance.

XIV. Principles are regulative or regulated.  
The former govern the arrangement of art and action; the latter do not.

RULES.

I. The principle of cognition is an analogous genus.

That is, it has under it such species to which it is attributed unequally.  
For example, innate principles are more principles than postulates, and those principles that exist per se are more principles than those by accident.  
Just as substance is the measure of the accident, so more dignified principles are the measures of the less dignified.

II. Simple principles are either things or simple concepts; complex are complete sentences.

This is the first and highest division of the principle, whether it is simple or complex.  
For we progress from simple to composite.  
There are, however, two kinds of simple principles.  
First, there are things that lead us into the knowledge of others; then there are concepts or simple notions in the mind that depend on things.  
Thus God is the first name, and I am is the first verb.  
Therefore, these are called the first simple principles.  
Complex principles are called axioms, in the broad sense of the word, as the Stoics use it.

III. The incomplete principle admits three co-essential principles, either all or most.

There are three co-essential principles, as they call them, that is, those which signify the essence of a thing: and they are inflected by the endings, ium, ile, are.
The first ending indicates active power, and thus, the form and property of a thing: the second indicates passive power: the third, the operation itself.
These three principles pertain to all created things, insofar as they are aforementioned by the faculty of acting: it does not pertain to God according to that.
Thus, in creation, these three are; the creative or factive, who can create, namely God: the creatable, who can be created: and to create, or action, by which the creative is the creating, so to speak, and the creatable created.
Thus also good, great, man, sage, and the like must be separated by these three co-essential principles.
But beware of thinking that those terms should be used in discourse, bonificative, bonifiable, and bonifying.
For these terms serve only invention, not enunciation.
Therefore, Latin circumlocution and paraphrasis should be used.

IV. Natural innate principles are the same everywhere and for all: acquired natural ones are not.

Nature, indeed, is the same everywhere among all people.
Thus, the light of reason is common to all humans: and therefore, all admit those principles, One must live honorably, No one must be harmed.
But diversity is observed here infinitely because of the diversity of talents.
For even if the understanding of principles is the same among humans, the talent of all is not one and the same; indeed, it depends on temperament.
Hence it is rightly said that ignorance causes a depraved disposition, so that a person maliciously denies first principles.
Yet the error of a few individuals is not to be attributed to the kind or nature of humans, but the whole matter is to be judged distinctly.
If the foundation of natural principles is considered, they have one and the same reason in our conscience.
Nevertheless, because the weak reason of humans often falters in deducing conclusions and connecting principles, and indeed in many, malice is added to weakness, it happens that pure matters in their principles are imputed to the act of reasoning, as they say.
Therefore, not everything that is concluded from principles implanted by nature (let the same judgment apply to principles revealed by God) accords with that foundation according to the form of eternal reason.
For much impurity intercedes between those principles and our conclusions due to the tenuity of intellect, weakness of reason, and in many cases, perversity and malice of talent.
Thus, truly are conclusions purely drawn from their principles; those from the force of their principles, from which they proceed, have their certain immutability.
Thus, for example, it is an eternal and immutable principle, according to the eternal, immutable, and divine law, that God must be worshipped.
From this principle, it is purely and rightly concluded that divine worship must be rendered to God alone.
From this conclusion, again generally, these two are purely connected: first, Neither is a doctrine, nor a doctrine ambiguous about the true God and his worship, to be approved: second, Those who by nefarious art renounce the true God and who attribute divine things to another or ask for benefits, which indeed are never other than divine, and communication and revelations from demons, are not to be tolerated.
These conclusions are as necessary as the principles themselves: except that principles are firm by themselves, while conclusions are demonstrated from those principles.
Thus, the principles of civil law are, To live honorably, To harm no one, To give each their due.
From the first, this conclusion is purely inferred: It is not proper for a man to nurture long hair.
This argument is referred to in Apostle 1 Cor. 11, verses 13, 14, 15.
For the Apostle establishes, imitating the footsteps of Moses; that nature itself is the most certain teacher not only of what is right and good, but also of honesty, and like-wise, order and form pertaining to honesty.
From this principle, it is rightly concluded that we ought to be imitators of nature by reason of what is good and honest, not, however, to disrupt in reality or form those institutions of nature, of which God is the author.
From the second principle, that law from Deut. 22, verse 8, is to be deduced:
When you build a new house, then make a parapet for your roof, that you may not bring bloodguilt upon your house.
For since the structure of Syrian houses was such that you could walk comfortably on their roofs, it was not to be allowed that anyone’s life should be endangered from the roof; just as it would have certainly eventuated if such walkable roofs had been without a parapet and lacked enclosure or barriers around them.
Finally, from the third principle, that conclusion is derived, The magistrate must be honored.
For this is owed to him according to the verse:
    The tree is to be honored, whose shadow protects us.

V. A principle is either a cause undemonstrable, indemonstrable; or evident for demonstration, not needing demonstration, even if demonstrable; or finally demonstrable and needing demonstration somewhere.

A principle is immediate or mediate.
That is indemonstrable; this is demonstrable.
Understand here demonstration from first principles.
For there are two kinds of demonstration; one is ostensive, the other leading to the impossible: and ostensive is again either from the prior or the posterior.
That demonstration from first principles, required directly and by itself for science, proceeds from causes to effects, and from the essence of the thing to be demonstrated to its properties.
A posteriori demonstration is not resolved into principles, but into experience: for it rises from effects to causes.
Deduction to the impossible or absurd is not necessary by itself, but is used because of human deficiency, such as ignorance or deceit and malice.
Now regarding immediate and simply first principles, those are plainly indemonstrable: if we understand demonstration from first principles.
Thus this principle, God is, cannot be demonstrated by first principles: because nothing is prior to God, indeed nothing is even coeqal or equal to Him.
However, it is demonstrated from effects; which since they cannot be so great and of such a kind by themselves, are necessarily referred to the most wise, best, and most powerful cause.
Thus also this principle: Of any thing, either it can be said that it is, or it is not, is indemonstrable.
That a cause is by nature prior to its effect can be demonstrated, but scarcely needs to be done for anyone.
But it is plainly clear to anyone that one and two make three.
But that God is not compound requires demonstration for the unlearned.
This indeed proceeds from the fact that every true perfection must be affirmed of God, and every imperfection denied of Him.
Indeed, what is evident to one more ingenious or experienced can be obscure to another.
Therefore, it is clear that first principles and simply immediate ones cannot be demonstrated from first principles: mediated ones can.
Yet both those and these can be demonstrated by reduction to the impossible.
But, you inquire, it was said above that all principles mainly said must be immediate.
Certainly, I say, this was said.
But observe, that something is either simply immediate or in some respect and in its own kind.
Therefore, not all principles are equally immediate.
Some object here, even those principles, The whole is greater than its part, It is impossible for the same to be and not be, and the like, which are said to be immediate, can be proven from first principles: because they are, for example, represented in divine ideas, or because God could not do otherwise, or finally because it seems so to my intellect, which since it is by participation in the divine intellect, cannot be deceived.
However, this is not demonstration from first principles, where the remote cause of the cohesion of the subject and predicate is given.

VI. Innate principles are inherent in humans, not in terms of the material, that is, the words themselves, but in terms of the formal, that is, the meaning itself.

Principles are usually divided into those that are about the end, to which we are led by natural law, and those that deal with the means pertaining to that end.
Principles pertaining to the end are of three kinds, according to the threefold order of inclinations naturally disposed in us.
For some of these are universal, by which any substance tends towards the good, according to nature, for its preservation, using those things which are beneficial and driving away those contrary to its preservation.
Other inclinations are common to animals; insofar as nature has taught all animals that each species should serve its propagation and preservation.
Finally, other inclinations are particular to humans according to the nature of reason, by which they excel other living beings.
Hence in humans exist threefold innate principles.
For some of them regard humans as individual substances: here is the principle, To be is better than not to be.
And, Whatever pertains to being must be pursued.
Then others regard humans as animals: here is the principle, Whatever contributes to the preservation of the species must be embraced.
Finally, others regard humans as humans, such as, God must be worshipped.
And we affirm that these threefold principles are fittingly instilled in human nature.
But how are they instilled?
It is clear that humans are born with a negative ignorance of all things.
Even though the faculty of understanding is in the human newly brought into this light, it is so submerged that it appears little above the senses, much less so among matters.
Gradually, however, then from the sparks of the brain begins to shine the little flame of understanding, so that it appears that man is a rational animal.
For at first, the infant understands confusedly; hence distinctly, apprehending simple things; further doubting, then composing and dividing, or affirming and denying certain judgments, quickly categorically, but more slowly grasping hypothetical ones: advancing further, they reason and confirm doubts; finally, they arrange their concepts.
And here now things and words are discerned, and between these are concepts or notions, both primary and secondary.
From all of which it is clear that no principles are born with us. 
But in one word to all this, the response is, to stray from the question.
For when we say that certain principles are born with us, we do not mean that the words or terms by which these notions consist are implanted in us; but that they are virtually present in the active intellect, just as a tree is already in the seed.
Indeed, I say, the formal aspect of those principles is present in us, as the form of a tree is present in the seed itself, hence it is said that the first principles are present in us in signified act, although they are not present in exercised act.
For this reason, Scaliger in book 3 poetry, chapter 1, aptly says: Certain thoughts are born with us, which are equally the same for all, are equally approved by all, such as those propositions, which are like certain principles of contemplation, such as: Of any thing, either it can truly be said, It is, It is not.
And that: Every whole is greater than its part.
And the same in book 3 poetry, chapters 12 and 20, he teaches that certain innate seeds of eternity, or zopyra, are in us.
Cicero also says in defense of Milo: For this, judges, is not a written but a born law, which we do not learn, receive, read; but we have seized, drawn, expressed it from nature itself, to which we have been made, not taught; not instituted, but imbued: so that if our life fell into some ambushes, if into violence, weapons of robbers or enemies, every honorable reason for expediting safety was present.
The same in book 1 on the nature of the gods. 
There is, he says, no nation so barbarous, no people so wild, in which this persuasion is not inherent; that there is a God. 
Rightly indeed.
For the Apostle in Romans 1 and 2 teaches, "that which is known of God" is impressed on our minds, and not only expressed in the workmanship of heaven and earth.
And the stubbornness of the impious, who furiously struggle, yet cannot extricate themselves from the fear of God, is a rich testimony that this persuasion, that there is some God, is mighty in all humans, and is deeply ingrained as if in the innermost marrow.

VII. Principles are hidden or evident.

This distribution pertains to principles of every kind.  
But Galen applies them to innate principles in this way.  
Innate principles are hidden insofar as they lie hidden in our minds: Evident insofar as they are clear.  
Hence, Galen calls them hidden, because they are implanted in our minds by nature, born with us and provided and approved by the common intelligence of all human beings; and evident, because they shine with their own light.  
To these, Galen opposes operative principles, which belong to those things that fall under the senses, of which kinds are white, black; sweet, bitter; hard, soft.  
And these are initiated by the senses but perfected by observation and usage.  
In this kind, systematic observation, the consistent observation of many things, holds primacy.  
But here, beware not to confuse the understanding of those innate principles with the principles themselves, that is, that initial cognition also given by nature, which we bring with us as soon as we are born.  
For innate principles are logical assumptions, notions, axioms, anticipations, that is, preconceived information of the mind, common knowledge; the understanding of principles, as well as of order, is reasoning, foresight, or, as Aristotle says, induction, propaedeutic, anticipation, or preconceived notion.  
Therefore, innate principles are the object, operative are the faculty itself.

VIII. Common principles must be carefully distinguished from proper ones, lest a hasty statement leads to transitioning into another genus.

A major fault is the transition into another genus, a shift from one type to another, or a leap from one discipline to another: because the boundaries of disciplines are thereby confused. 
This is just as disgraceful and harmful as if the borders of fields were uprooted. 
Therefore, one must diligently apply effort not to commit this fault. 
The proposed rule serves this purpose. 
For since some principles are common, which can be applied to many and different sciences: for example, The whole is greater than its part: If you take equals from equals, the remainders will be equal: others are proper, serving certain sciences: such as in the medical art, The remedies of opposites are opposites: in Ethics, Virtue consists in moderation: in Jurisprudence, Nothing is so fitting to life as for people to observe what they have agreed among themselves, as is the saying of Papinian about pacts: since, I say, some principles are common, others are proper: it should not be thought that immediately there is a transition into another genus, if common principles are applied in many disciplines. 
Thus, metaphysical principles are common to all lower disciplines: such as, Every being is good, The necessary is prior to the contingent, Nothing is cause and effect of itself. 
These and similar first philosophy principles are common to all disciplines. 
Then, there are certain principles common to mathematical disciplines, especially the subordinate ones, as they are called. 
Thus, the principle applies to both arithmetic and geometry: If you add or subtract equals from equals, the remainders are equal. 
A common principle of arithmetic and music is, The ternary is the root of proportions. 
As for proper principles, if they are transferred into foreign territory outside their homeland and family, that disgraceful shift is committed. 
Thus, it is proper to physics that heavy things can move downward, light things upward. 
Also, The senses are harmed by strong stimuli. So too for medicine, Opposites are treated by opposites, similars are strengthened by similars. 
So for theology, Sacred Scripture is the word of God, Christ the God-man is the mediator between God and men. 
Yet it must not be overlooked that the proper principles of certain disciplines can be applied in others for clarification purposes. 
Thus, the mystery of the Holy Trinity cannot be proven from the book of nature or demonstrated by reason-derived arguments: it can, however, be illustrated by various examples and similarities. 
In the same way, the doctrine of regeneration can be illustrated by the physical doctrine of motion.

IX. To innate principles can be made a double addition: one of human principles, the other of divine principles.

A natural principle is said in two ways generally, and especially.  
In one way, it is divided into innate and acquired; in another way, it is meant for the innate; and thus some say that either human or divine principles come to the natural principle.  
We more clearly say that a double addition can be made to the innate principle.  
For either something grows together with it or something is infused.  
To grow together means nothing other than something being added to the principles of nature as if pushed by nature itself; to be infused means nothing other than something being derived from a superior principle above us all and our nature, whether in the state of the journey or in the state of homeland.  
From this, it follows that, just as an offshoot adhered to a branch is lower than the trunk to which it adheres and depends on it, so those principles adhering to nature, inferior to natural, that is, innate principles, and serving the same; conversely, those superior things that come from above are like judges of the natural.  
Therefore, we call these divine, and those human.  
Divine or supernatural principles are close to those principles that are in the mind of God, which are eternal and the most universal principle and the exemplar of all rules, and thus such a rule, which never deviates by any other principle.  
Innate principles obtain the second degree from divine principles; human principles the third: thus is the order.  
Firstly are the simply divine principles, which are the very reason of divine wisdom, which establishes men in time.  
And this is that eternal law, queen, president, ruler, and rule of the just and unjust, remaining one and the same without distinction, not being one thing here, and another elsewhere, nor otherwise at another time (as Augustine speaks), but asserting its truth and eternity immutable in God above all things and rules from every change and destruction.  
Indeed, truly, why should there not be an eternal and immutable rule of all rules, when the only principle above this law is nothing other than the divine wisdom itself, determining the reason of justice and injustice in created things to its image?  
Therefore, from this unchanged and constant rule, which is essential to that divine majesty, through some communication and participation, all other rules, and from this, so to speak, having been ruled, existed in created things, some being informed in a silent instinct and way, others indeed handed down by some open testimony, whether of God or of those in whom was the solid learning and certain authority: and therefore this one principle is called eternal, the rest having existed in time.  
For natural principles also are impressed on nature in time, inspired with supernatural power by God, and infused by the Lord, and human are established by right reason, and from all these, conclusions either through reasoning or by the grace of God are derived in time.  
Therefore, the common rule of all principles is that eternal principle, which is in the mind of God as an archetype: and this alone is the rule of supernatural principles revealed in time.  
Moreover, these supernatural principles, along with that eternal one, are the rule of innate principles.  
But the rule of human principles is twofold, besides that eternal law, namely, revealed and innate principles.  
From these sources, therefore, human principles proceed (otherwise called rights): these being the cradles of those: which if they stray from, they are unworthy of the name of principles, and if by the living work, equitable, they are called thus in the common people.  
Furthermore, from these principles, conclusions of two kinds are deduced; universal, for example, and particular.  
Thus, from this principle: No one is to be harmed: this general conclusion is derived: The trees of the neighbor are not to be harmed.  
From this general conclusion, a particular conclusion is derived, which is called a determination, circumscribed by certain singular terms, not by the authority of nature or Scripture, but rather by the judgment of the wise, common notions, namely principles and conclusions, accommodating particularly to the mode of singular things.  
The mode of these determinations is placed in convenience: which has three objects, namely, persons, for the good of whom these conclusions are made; then things and actions, concerning which particular conclusions are made; and finally circumstances, with which persons, things, and actions are usually clothed and varied: of which some are perpetual, which necessarily accompany persons, things, and actions indefinitely; others are not so perpetual, which are varied by turns and perpetual succession, such as mode, cause, instrument, and the like.  
But let us return to our divine and human principles.  
Divine principles are to be held in greater faith than all other principles.  
Human ones also are not to be compared in authority and dignity with the innate; nor is the discovery of human principles to be attributed to common wits, but to heroic ones.  
Of all principles, finally, this is the reasoning, that their sense is twofold.  
For just as double sense is given to man by nature, common, by natural law, e.g., You shall not kill; and singular, by the testimony of conscience: but you did kill; so also a double testimony is necessary to be given by God, by which He might inform us in the school of grace; one of common notions in the mind; the other of singular notions in the conscience, so that the use of Scripture might be made salutary for us by Him, mostly by common, sometimes even by singular testimony and revelation of Him, applied ordinarily or beyond order.