ENCYCLOPEDIA  
SECOND BOOK  
EXHIBITING  
TECHNOLOGY, that is, the Doctrine of the properties, order, & number of disciplines.  

CHAPTER ONE.  
On the properties of disciplines.  
PRECEPTS.  

TECHNOLOGY is according to the previously known disciplines, concerning their nature and series.  
It is called in the same sense Technography.  

And it is general or special.  
General technology explains the properties or affections, order, and general division of the disciplines.  

The properties of disciplines regard the agreement or difference of them.  

The properties of disciplines concerning agreement are absolute or related.

Absolute properties concern disciplines considered in themselves.  
They are of the first or second class.  
Properties of the first class are concerning the end and subject of disciplines.  

Regarding the end, there are two properties: 1. To have a proper, adequate, and possible end, 2. To provide means sufficient to attain that end.  

Regarding the subject, there are likewise two properties: namely, to have a subject, 1. adequate, 2. stable.  

Absolute properties of the second class concern the matter, form, and adjuncts of disciplines.  

Regarding the matter, there are seven properties: namely, to have true, clear, easy, useful, necessary, homogeneous or specifically suitable, and sufficient precepts.  

Regarding the form, this is the property: to have a certain and methodical disposition of precepts; and to have it so arranged that there are two parts of each discipline, one general, the other special; whether the method is synthetic or analytic.  

Regarding adjuncts, it is common to disciplines that they are necessary, useful, certain, pleasant, etc.  

Related properties of disciplines are either concerning Nature, concerning the disciplines themselves, or indeed concerning their essence and existence.  

Regarding Nature, there are two properties; namely that art is an emulator of Nature, and at the same time is a more certain guide than Nature.  

Regarding the disciplines themselves, there are likewise two properties, namely subordination and binding of the forums.  
Subordination is where a lower discipline depends on some higher one: otherwise called subalternation.  

The binding of forums is where all disciplines harmoniously agree with each other.  

Concerning essence and existence, disciplines are either in idea or in subject.  

The properties of disciplines concerning difference are two.  
1. To have a subject of information, treatment, and operations.  
2. To have as the end either the contemplation of truth, the action of virtue, or the provision of instruments subservient to truth or virtue.

RULES.  

I. Technology presents the nature and positions of disciplines.  
Whereby two things must necessarily be known beforehand.  
Thus it happens that we reach a deeper understanding of the nature of any discipline.  
Then it is incredible to say how much this aids memory, if, whenever you read, hear, or see something, you immediately think to which discipline it pertains.  
In addition, it can more easily learn a discipline if its position is held in the realm of Encyclopedia, thus its agreement with other disciplines, and difference from the same.  
Finally, if there is to be a discussion on some theme, it is greatly beneficial to run through the series of disciplines and examine what can be brought forth from each discipline on that theme.  

II. The properties of disciplines are themselves the laws of establishing and examining philosophical disciplines.  
Just as man's properties argue the constitution of man from his matter and form, and are like the Lydian stone, by which the nature of man can and ought to be examined; so too the properties of disciplines are essential conditions required in establishing disciplines, and therefore to be applied in examining them.  
Thus, it is rightly said that they are the same rules for establishing and examining disciplines.

III. Each discipline should have a certain, proper, and adequate end.  
First, each discipline must have an end: because no discipline was invented recklessly or in vain, but all were established for the sake of some good.  
Hence, it is rightly said that God, nature, and art do nothing in vain.  
Then the end must be proper.  
Just as each discipline has its own essence, so too its own end.  
Moreover, that proper end should be commensurate to the general one, which is some perfection of man, and to the subject of each discipline.  
For it is man's imperfection that he cannot accurately know this or that knowable thing, hence it is necessary that a particular discipline remedies a particular deficiency of nature.  
Thus, for example, man cannot perfectly know the nature of the body.  
It is necessary, therefore, that there be a discipline that addresses this deficiency.  
Hence philosophy is compared to a pharmacy, where various medicines are opposed to various diseases.  
And thus it is said that there are as many parts of philosophy as there are ways in which man as man is to be perfected.  
Thirdly, the end of disciplines must be adequate, that is, not too broad nor too narrow.  
For if it is too broad, it is not proper; if too narrow, it is not perfect.  
Lastly, the end must be possible, that is, such a perfection of man as can certainly be provided by the discipline, to remedy the deficiency of nature in him; also some relation to theology, jurisprudence, and medicine.  
The end of each discipline can be attained if intention, use, and unimpaired means are considered.  
For by reason of execution, the end cannot always be achieved: and the abuse of means, also their neglect, and other external causes corrupting or impeding may prevent the end proposed by any discipline from being obtained by the one who has learned the discipline.  
This also pertains to the distinction of disciplines into ἀνεξούσιος, accurate, and συνοφαῖας, conjectural.  
For from the former, the end is always achieved, but not from the latter: as from the art of medicine health is not always achieved; nor persuasion from rhetoric.  
Here, too, the distinction between internal and external end may be applied.  
The former is always achieved by the artificer: the latter not always.  
Thus the internal end of rhetoric is to provide persuasive instruments: the external, to persuade.  
The orator always achieves the former; not necessarily the latter.

IV. Every discipline ought to perfectly provide sufficient means to achieve the goal.
It is not enough to merely indicate the end unless the means are demonstrated, which lead us to the end.
It is necessary, therefore, that every discipline provides means, which can lead us to the desired destination: and indeed perfectly.
Understand here the perfection of parts, as they call it, not of degrees.

V. Every discipline should have a subject whose knowledge is useful and necessary.
Every discipline must have a certain subject because it is necessary to teach something.
Moreover, that subject must be valuable, that is, arranged in such a way that its knowledge is notably useful and necessary; because common matters can be learned outside systems of disciplines; and useless matters should not be learned.
The subject of a discipline has two parts: the thing considered, and the mode of consideration, or material and formal.
The former can be taught in many disciplines at once, the latter in only one.
Hence the common saying: What is homogeneous in one art is heterogeneous in another; this is true concerning the mode of consideration.

VI. There ought to be seven properties of principles in any discipline.
Firstly, principles ought to be true, because an encyclopedia is not sophistical, nor, so to speak, a "mean philosophy" and "false writing," but it is philosophy, in the broad sense of this word.
Then, they ought to be clear; because if they are obscure, the art will not achieve its end, which is to rightly perfect a person, not to lead them ponderously.
Thirdly, they ought to be easy, for the same reason.
And indeed, it is the nature of truth to be both clear and easy.
Fourthly, they ought to be useful; because what ought to perfect a person is useful.
Fifthly, they ought to be necessary, not indeed absolutely and supremely, so that they are reciprocal, but yet in such a way that they produce knowledge, that is, such understanding which does not fluctuate.
From which it further follows that principles can sometimes be both negated and singular, if indeed the matter itself is of necessary negation and singular nature.
Sixthly, it is required that principles be homogeneous, since they ought to aim at the same subject and the same end, as to a center.
Even though the matters of the same discipline may differ in species, for example, man and beast in physics, yet principles of things differing in species can agree in species, for example, the principles of physics.
Finally, they will be sufficient; because perfect knowledge is required, not in degree, but in the essence of every useful and true thing.
From these, it is clear that sophistry, garrulity, and imperfection are especially contrary to disciplines.

VII. Theoretical disciplines should be taught by the synthetic method, practical and poetic by the analytic; and in both, two parts of each discipline should be established, one general, the other special.
The synthetic method is completed with the knowledge of the subject, principles, and affections or properties in general, and in specific treatment of the parts of the subject.
Here, remember this rule: The subject of the discipline is considered in the direct and oblique case.
For example, a natural body is the subject of physics in the nominative, that is, as such, and in the genitive, that is, of the body's principles, properties, and species.
The analytic method is completed with the knowledge of the end, subject, and means in general, and in specific application of means to a certain subject.
That former method of teaching and learning suits the sciences, since there a property is demonstrated about the subject through proximate causes; the latter suits prudence and arts, because there the end is sought through certain means to be introduced into the subject.
Moreover, because there is a general and special treatment in both, it is correctly established that there are two parts of each discipline, one general or common, the other special or proper.
But these are evident from the special treatment of each discipline.

VIII. Each discipline should be an imitator of nature, namely, nature when it is in proper condition.
This is a common saying among all philosophers, derived from Aristotle, who in Physics 2, chapter 2, states, "Art imitates nature," namely, so far as nature is in proper condition.
They imitate nature in those things where it is possible, whether those are under our control or beyond us; but not in those things which are apart from us.
Thus nature produces substance, which art cannot do: nature is an internal principle, art is not.
This imitation primarily consists in:
1. Art does nothing in vain but everything with a certain reason and for the sake of a certain good.
2. It always does what is best.
3. It does not offer superfluous things, nor does it lack in what is necessary.
4. It does everything with a certain order.

IX. Each discipline should be a more certain guide than nature, namely, when it is deficient.  
Nature is considered in two ways.  
First, inasmuch as it is in proper condition, even after the fall.  
For in this way, nature is the daughter of God.  
Then, inasmuch as it is corrupted by the fall: and thus, a soiled garment taints nature, that daughter of God.  
In the former way, art is an imitator of nature; in the latter, it is a more certain guide than nature: because it strives to supply the deficiency of nature.  

X. In divine matters, there is a threefold subordination: by reason of the subject, principles, and end.
Subordination is when a lower discipline depends on a higher one, either by reason of the subject and principles or by reason of the end.
The former is given in theoretical disciplines, the latter in practical ones.
Subordination by reason of the subject occurs when the subject of one discipline depends on the subject of another.
Subordination by reason of principles happens when the principles of one discipline depend on the principles of another.
Both subordination types are either general or special.
General subordination is when all disciplines subordinate to Metaphysics, since the subjects and principles of these disciplines depend on its subject and principles.
Thus, Economics is subordinated to Ethics, likewise Politics to Ethics, and Jurisprudence to Politics, by reason of their subjects and principles.
However, this subordination is considered too remote by philosophers.
Special subordination is when a subalternated discipline receives its subject, principles, and affections from the subalternating discipline.
This is called the most proper subordination, which occurs only in Mathematics.
In this manner, Music is subordinated to Arithmetic, and Optics to Geometry.
For Music derives its subject, principles, and affections from Arithmetic, and Optics from Geometry.
And this subordination has a place only in sciences because there are these three: subject, principles, and affections.
As for subordination by reason of the end, it exists only in practical disciplines, where a discipline is said to be subordinated by reason of the end, whose end is under the end of the superior discipline, such that the subalternating discipline practically directs the subalternated one and commands it to direct its actions to the superior end.
This is proper subordination found in practical disciplines.
In this way, Economics is subordinated to Politics; because Politics is concerned with a superior end and commands Economics to accommodate its actions to the superior end.
But besides this proper subordination by reason of the end, there is also improper subordination by reason of the end, where the subalternating discipline has no command over the subalternated one but considers the superior end contemplatively: in this manner, Ethics is subordinated to Physics.
For Physics considers only contemplatively the best operation of a human, which is the perfect operation of the intellectual part: moral philosophy, however, teaches what each person should do in order to live perfectly, that is, well and happily.

XI. All disciplines are contained by a very close connection with each other.
Cicero, at the beginning of his speech for Archias, solemnly states: All arts that pertain to humanity have a certain common bond, and are held together by a certain kind of kinship.
Thus it indeed is.
For more than a sisterly bond is to be observed between all and each part of the Encyclopedia; and the greatest harmony, which especially consists in three things.
Firstly, there is observed an agreement in regard to truth; because truth is in harmony with truth.
True principles indeed harmonize with true principles, true conclusions harmonize with true conclusions, and true conclusions ultimately harmonize with true principles.
And although there are degrees of truth, yet that most friendly harmony is not disturbed; just as among ancestors, parents, children, and grandchildren, supreme friendship does not cease to exist, because some are higher, others lower.
Furthermore, there is agreement in the disciplines concerning their purpose, because all have this goal in common, that the glory of God be illuminated and the misery of man be alleviated.
Hence Plato most solemnly said, the most solemn fame of God is spread in the stars and arts.
Hence also it is, that disciplines extend mutual and helpful hands to one another; which is the third agreement, concerning mutual assistance.
Of which the phrase "πανδνμειχαη" pertains: disciplines are united in usage.

XII. Boundaries of disciplines must be established, lest there be a transition from one type of discipline to another.
It is very important that the boundaries of disciplines are set correctly.
Indeed, it cannot happen that the proper order in the Encyclopedia is maintained if there is not a clear distinction, so to speak, among the limits, territories, and households.
Even though this distinction can be derived from any discipline: nevertheless, this prior knowledge is not superfluous.
For it is necessary here to know in advance how theoretical, practical, and poetic disciplines differ in general: because this is the foundation of specific treatment.

XIII. Disciplines are distinguished by their subjects and ends; and from these they derive their unity.
First of all, the subject is of information, treatment, or operation.
The subject of information is intellect, will, emotion, memory, or speech.
The subject of treatment, or doctrine, is being, which is explained either in general or in particular.
The subject of operation, or use, is likewise being, to which instructions are applied.
The end of disciplines is either the knowledge of truth, the action of good, or the provision of an instrument by which we are advanced to the knowledge of truth or the action of good.
Furthermore, the unity of a theoretical discipline is derived from the unity of the subject of treatment.

XIV. Contemplative disciplines always attain their principal end, which is contemplation, by themselves; but practical and poetic disciplines do not by themselves, but through another habit or power.
Theoretical disciplines are concerned solely with explaining the nature of things and do not provide rules for making anything, even if the matters they discuss can be accomplished by human effort.
For this reason, we say that Geometry is contemplative: because it provides no rules for acting or making, even though many geometric objects can be created through human art, such as a pentagon by a carpenter.
Therefore, if in mathematical disciplines such rules are proposed that prescribe the method for drawing certain figures, it should not be concluded that mathematical disciplines are practical or poetic, even if they are so called: as when we say practical Arithmetic, practical Geometry, and so on.
For then biotics and mechanics, which are the practical aspects of mathematics, are intermixed with mathematics so that their use becomes evident.
However, practical and poetic disciplines provide instructions for doing or making something, even if they simultaneously explain its nature, parts, and properties.
For this reason, moral philosophy is called practical, because of the guidelines for action it provides; although it also discusses the nature of virtues.
The same judgment applies to poetics.
From these considerations, it is clear that contemplative sciences always achieve their principal end, which is contemplation, by themselves, since this is their immediate act: whereas practical and poetic sciences do not by themselves, but through another habit or power.
For the chief end of moral science is the work of virtue.
But this is achieved not by moral science itself, but by virtue.
In the same way, the main end of medicine is health; and of military art, victory: yet neither attains its end by itself, but through an executive power.

XV. What is the subject of treatment in one discipline can be the subject of operation in another.
Thus, real being is the subject of treatment in Metaphysics, and it is the subject of operation in Logic.
Note here that the subject of information and operation is called external; the subject of treatment, internal.

XVI. Every discipline must deal with some being; and that to the extent it is either νοητόν, intelligible, καλοκαγαθόν, honest, or τεχνικόν or ὀργανικόν, artificial.
There is no science of non-being because non-being has no attributes.
Therefore, only being can engage our intellect.
Hence Aristotle rightly says, ἐπιστήμη πέρι ὄντας τί πρᾶγμα, science is divided according to the thing itself.
Things that are to be known exist in a threefold difference.
Some are only νοητά, that is, they have the nature that they can be understood: hence contemplative disciplines emerge.
Others are so composed that their knowledge is directed toward καλοκαγαθίαν, that is, honesty: hence operative disciplines arise.
Finally, others have a nature such that their knowledge is directed toward production: hence productive disciplines originate.
From this, moreover, the differences of individual disciplines can be easily gathered: for example, Metaphysics deals with being in general; Arithmetic with numerable being; Geometry with measurable being; Ethics with honest being; Logic with disputable being.
Whence come those phrases: Logical being, Mathematical being, Physical being.

XVII. Every discipline is considered either in idea or in subject. 
Every doctrine is considered either formally, as it is by nature and in its kind, simply, or subjectively and in a composite manner, in some way. 
What is by nature and in kind or idea is called abstract; what is otherwise, concrete. 
However, what is by nature and in idea is more excellent than what is concrete because it has nothing mixed, dissimilar, or unlike itself. 
Thus justice in itself is always one and the same, unchangeable in any persons, places, or times, but the same in the just person, as in its subject, undergoes change. 
Therefore, when speaking of the entire Encyclopedia, we must take care not to confuse its idea, i.e., its form, as it is purely in itself, with its subject, in which it can be deformed and become, so to speak, παρακεκαλυμμένη. 
For if what belongs to the subject or individual is confused with its undefiled essence, neither can be rightly known, neither the dignity of philosophy nor the truth of the subject, in which it is, as it were, modified. 
But our intention is to discuss that Encyclopedia which is called absolute and is such simply, in an excellent degree, not that which is called limited and modified, and often such in a certain respect, in a degree of temperance or mixture. 
It is, as it were, the purest form; the other is like a form superadded to matter and determined more narrowly according to the condition of its matter. 
For since the subject of the Encyclopedia is man, who by its comprehension is called a philologist, philosopher, theologian, etc., and indeed he is greatly surrounded by vanity and weakness, it cannot be that precepts can be written about philosophy as it is in the subject. 
For precepts pertain to constant and perpetual things. 
Hence it further becomes clear how unjust those are who at this time recognize no other Encyclopedia than that which is according to men, in men, and who depend on the judgment and authority of men, as if that absolute Encyclopedia had either completely vanished or fallen into the hands and power of men by the law of servitude; since the form of philosophy is permanent and not changeable at the will of man, to whom all men must adhere, but not defer to ignorant and weak men. 
On the contrary, the Encyclopedia in subject is thus held. 
Its manner cannot be circumscribed because it varies in each individual and is most diverse among all. 
It varies, I say, in each one because the recipient receives according to the manner of its receptivity. 
It varies among all for the same reason, because knowledge increases more in some than in others and ignorance decreases; though no one from among all comprehends the entire form of the Encyclopedia in all respects.
And although no one can perfectly attain the nature of this wisdom, nonetheless those who see more than elsewhere are rightly called wise. 
For it is frivolous what the Pythagoreans contended, that only God is σοφόν, and no man can be called wise. 
For thus because God is wise, man can and indeed should also be called wise as he is the image of God. 
There is, however, nonetheless the greatest distinction: for the wisdom of God is archetypal, original, essential, and indeed the very essence of God, whereas the wisdom of man is ectypal, dependent on that archetypal illumination, and accidental.
Finally, the Encyclopedia considered in the subject falls upon man, either as he is man, as he is a non-Christian, or as he is a Christian. 
The former is pure; the latter is often purer than this one, which falls upon the Christian insofar as the light of reason is more refined; this last one is often purer than the previous because the light of grace approaches the light of nature rightly illuminated by the rays of natural principles. 
For there are often Christians who do not refine the light of reason and hence are less philologists, philosophers, etc., than pagans. 
And again, there are Christians who refine their reason, and in this way, they see more in the Encyclopedia than the first teachers of philosophy among pagans.