CHAPTER II.

On the Order of Disciplines.

PRECEPTS.

The order of disciplines is by invention, nature, dignity, or doctrine.

The order of invention is that by which disciplines, the more general they are, the later they are discovered.

The order of nature is that by which disciplines, the simpler and more general they are, are earlier by nature.

The order of dignity is that by which disciplines, having more dignified subjects and ends, are earlier, that is, more excellent.

The order of doctrine, or of knowledge, is either of accurate, or of better doctrine. 
The former is the same as the order of nature: the latter is suited to the ordinary understanding of learners.

RULES.

I. The order of invention in disciplines is almost accidental.
The reason for this rule is that the inventors of disciplines lived at different times and, with various opportunities presenting themselves, discovered these or those under the free guidance and auspices of God.
Therefore, this order must be discerned from chronology.
Therefore, consult it for guidance.
However, it is certain that more general disciplines were discovered later, because it is the nature of invention to derive generalities from particulars.

II. The order of nature in disciplines is unchangeable.
For it is so arranged that things which have nature are immutable.
Therefore, the order of nature, as in all things, cannot vary in disciplines as well.
A perpetual law indeed prevails here: The simpler a thing is, the earlier it is by nature.
If one keeps this guiding star in view, one can easily discern which disciplines are earlier or later by nature.

III. The dignity of disciplines is derived from the subject and the end.
For although dignity is also usually derived from the efficient cause, matter, form, effects, and adjuncts, these two are primarily considered in disciplines; and indeed, they are so considered that either individually or both come into consideration.
Thus, for example, theology is the most excellent of all disciplines because it has the most excellent subject, which is God, and the most excellent end, which is to show the way to attain the enjoyment of God.

IV. The order of accurate and better doctrine proceeds by different paths, not opposing ones.
For in the order of accurate doctrine, those disciplines that are simpler are preferred: in the order of better doctrine, those disciplines that are easier are preferred.
This ease is estimated in two ways: generally and specifically.
In the former, the capacity of the human intellect is considered in general terms; in the latter, specifically with regard to the individual and temperament.
It often happens that the order of better doctrine in theory yields to the order of better doctrine in practice; that is, as these or those intellects are more or less capable.
But seek more on the order of disciplines from chapter 4 of this Technology.