CHAPTER III.  
On the general divisions of the disciplines.

PRECEPTS.  
The general division of the disciplines is manifold.  
Discipline is

I. Internal, or external; that is, habitual, or systematic.  
The former is an intellectual habit, perfecting man, and making him apt for skillful contemplation or action: the latter is a methodical system concerning some knowable and useful matter, for educating and perfecting man.

II. Archetypal, or ectypal.  
The former is the cause of the latter; the latter is the effect of the former.

III. Architectonic, or subordinate.  
The former commands the latter: the latter serves the former, whence it is also called ancillary, likewise ministerial.

IV. Subalternating, or subalternated.  
The former proves something of the latter; the latter takes something proven by the former.

V. Pure, or sincere, or mixed, which is also intermediate.  
The former has the subject of one categorical; the latter of two.

VI. Properly, or improperly said.  
The former is a system of discipline; the latter is either a part of some individual system or a medley from various systems.

VII. Acroamatic, or exoteric.  
The former is of higher investigation; the latter of common doctrine.

VIII. Simple, or composite.  
The former is total, or partial.  
Total is the entire system; partial is a part of the system.  
Composite consists of parts from various disciplines.

IX. Objective, or directive.  
The former engages with primary notions, or the things themselves; the latter with words, and secondary notions.

X. Measuring, or measured.  
The former is the standard for others; the latter takes its standard from others.

XI. Accurate, or conjectural.  
The former relies on certain principles, whence it is also called scientific; the latter relies on probable principles and is called doctrinal.

XII. Real, or instrumental.  
The former deals with the things themselves; the latter with the tools of things.

XIII. General, or special.  
The former delivers general rules which many others use; the latter delivers its own.

XIV. Theoretical, practical, or poetic, that is, contemplative, active, or productive; or, contemplative (or speculative), operative, or effective.  
The former delivers the knowledge of truth; the second, the action of moral good; the third, the production of artificial good.

XV. Teaching, or using.  
The former delivers precepts; the latter shows the use of precepts.

XVI. Natural, or supernatural.  
The former is said of man, as he is a man; the latter is said of man, as he is a Christian.

RULES.

I. The general divisions of the disciplines wonderfully illuminate the nature and use of each.  
For since they are general, they can and should be applied to each. For example, Logic is a directive discipline, poetic, etc.  
They are applied either conjunctively, or disjunctively.  
Conjunctively, inasmuch as every discipline is external and internal, archetypal and ectypal, etc.  
Disjunctively, or alternatively; inasmuch as this or that discipline is architectonic, or subordinate; theoretical, practical, or poetic, etc.

II. Every discipline is internal and external.  
The reason is that every discipline is considered either as a habit in the mind or as a system outside the mind.  
Therefore, this is not a distribution of a genus into species, but of a subject with its adjuncts.

III. Every discipline is archetypal and ectypal.  
For either habitual discipline is the archetype of systematic discipline, or conversely systematic discipline is the archetype of habitual discipline.  
So, for example, habitual Logic in the mind of Aristotle is archetypal.  
Logic, which he committed to paper, is ectypal: but the same is archetypal, inasmuch as it gave rise to ectypal habitual Logic in the minds of the students.

IV. Architectonic disciplines are those endowed with theoretical, practical, or poetic authority.  
Theoretical authority belongs solely to Metaphysics; practical authority belongs to Politics and Theology; poetic authority belongs to Logic, insofar as it does not indeed govern things themselves, but shows our mind the norms by which it may subject them.

V. One and the same discipline is general and special.  
For, as can be seen in this Encyclopedia, all and each discipline are divided into a general part and a special part, because they explain their subject and purpose partly in general, partly in specific terms.  
Even though this is the case, some disciplines are rightly called general in respect to others. 
For example, Metaphysics is general; the rest are special, if compared with Metaphysics.  
Likewise, Ethics is general in relation to Economics and Politics.

VI. No discipline properly so called can be both theoretical and practical, if these terms are taken strictly; otherwise, if taken broadly.  
The reason for the first part is that theory and practice are thus distinguished in kind.  
Now indeed, every discipline properly so called is one in kind.  
Therefore, a theoretical discipline is purely theoretical, and a practical one is purely practical.  
The reason for the second part is that in this sense theory and practice are not distinguished in kind, but only in degree.  
For every discipline consists of theory, that is, the knowledge of precepts, and practice, that is, the use of precepts.  
Thus, in this sense, every discipline is theoretical and practical.  
And hence every discipline is also teaching and using.  
As for the remaining general divisions, they are explained in the following.