CHAPTER IV.  
On the order of disciplines.

PRECEPTS.

Special technology explains the number of disciplines.

That number is considered in terms of foundation and difference.

The foundation is in the highest categories "the being," that is, of that which can be comprehended by our mind; and also from the highest categories of human imperfection.

The difference of this number is of this kind:

Discipline is homogeneous or heterogeneous.

Homogeneous discipline is of one object, or matter.

And it is total or partial.

Total discipline, or properly speaking, is an entire system of homogeneous precepts.

And it is liberal or illiberal.

Liberal discipline is that which makes a man truly learned and literate.

And it is lower or higher.

Lower discipline is that which serves the higher.

And it is philological or philosophical.

Philological discipline is a system delivering the instruments of philosophy, theology, jurisprudence, and medicine.

And it is pure or intermediate.

Pure philological discipline is that which directs speech or reason only.  
There are Lexicons, Grammar, and Rhetoric: here is Logic.

The intermediate or mixed philological discipline is that which directs speech and reason simultaneously: as Oratory and Poetics.

Philosophical discipline is a system conveying things of such a kind, whose knowledge renders a man a philosopher.

And it is theoretical or practical.

The theoretical philosophical discipline is that which demonstrates the natural knowledge of truth.

And it is general or special.  
The former is Metaphysics; the latter is of substance, like Pneumatics and Physics, or of accident, like Mathematics.

Mathematics is pure or intermediate.  
The former is purely mathematics, like Arithmetic and Geometry; the latter is partly mathematics, partly physics; and it is either concerned with quantity and body, like Cosmography, Uranometry, and Geography, or with quality and body, like Optics and Music.

The practical philosophical discipline is that which demonstrates the action of moral good.

And it is general, like Ethics, or special, like Economics, Politics, and Scholastics.

Higher discipline is that which claims supremacy for itself.

And it is divine, like Theology, or human, like Jurisprudence and Medicine.

An illiberal discipline is that which does not make a man truly literate.

Partial or improperly so-called discipline is a part of some entire system, like Anthropology is a part of Physics.

Heterogeneous discipline is that which compiles its precepts from various homogeneous disciplines.

And it is properly or improperly so-called.  
The former includes Mnemonics, History, Chronology, and Architecture; the latter includes Paradoxology, Gnomology, etc.

RULES.

I. The number of disciplines is defined.  
Because things knowable are finite, and likewise the method of knowing, it is necessary, therefore, that it be defined in terms of the names of sciences or disciplines.  
As for the fact that mechanical arts are said to be infinite, this must be understood not strictly but rather approximately.  
The same judgment applies to infinite mixtures or the "Quodlibets" of disciplines.

II. One and the same person can engage in the study of various disciplines.  
Firstly, there are certain subtle, fiery, heroic, etc., minds that, without any trouble, learn various disciplines; this is not given to ordinary, earthy, slow, etc., minds.  
Furthermore, vocation or duty often requires the knowledge and use of more or fewer disciplines.

III. The number of disciplines ought to be proportionate to the things to be learned, and likewise to the remedying of human imperfection.  
Disciplines derive their name from learning.  
Therefore, their number should be constituted from the variety of things to be learned.  
This matter is indeed of great importance.  
Just as, in a well-ordered republic, it matters greatly that the boundaries of fields, or of the whole province or territory, be correctly established; so it is in the interest of the literary republic that disciplines and their boundaries be properly partitioned, so to speak.  
Here, the first rule is that the number of disciplines should neither be innumerable nor overly fragmented and too brief, but should match and exhaust the very knowable things, according to the rule: Sciences are divided as things themselves: "According to parts, in all things concerning first principles."  
The second rule is that things should not be multiplied according to words.  
Often, in practice, it happens that one and the same thing, and even discipline, is designated by two or more names, e.g., Metaphysics and First Philosophy: Physics and Physiology: Optics and Perspective: Politics and Moral Philosophy, etc.  
The third rule is that parts of disciplines should not be considered as separate and properly defined disciplines, e.g., Stoicheiology is a part of Physics; Aretology, a part of Ethics.  
The fourth rule is that compilations of disciplines should not be confused with the disciplines themselves.  
Moreover, the highest categories of "beings" are three: namely, theoretical, practical, and poetical, that is, entities falling under contemplation, action, and affection.  
Furthermore, theoretical and practical matters are natural or supernatural; poetical matters are liberal or illiberal.  
And all these are treated either individually or collectively.  
Thus, the highest categories of disciplines are derived.  
Moreover, the number of disciplines should be drawn in such a way that it takes into account human imperfection.  
For disciplines have been invented to heal the diseases of mind and body, or to edify them.  
Therefore, as many ways as man is to be healed, so to speak, or edified, there should be as many kinds of disciplines.  
However, man suffers from threefold ailments, namely, ignorance of the mind, malice of the will, and inexperience or sluggishness of mind, tongue, hand, etc.  
The first is expelled by wisdom, the second by prudence, and courage enriches the third.  
Thus, all disciplines can be reduced to these three highest categories.

IV. Philology and philosophy can be defined in two ways.  
Firstly, they are considered absolutely, in themselves; in this sense, Philology is a system of liberal arts, which cultivates speech and reason with certain instruments: Philosophy is a system of sciences and wisdoms, which a man can attain through the light of nature.  
Then they are considered relatively, as they serve the three higher faculties; in this way, Philology is a system of liberal instruments used by the three higher faculties: Philosophy is a system of sciences and wisdoms that prepare the mind for the three higher faculties.

V. Philology is sometimes opposed to philosophy, sometimes it is a part of it.  
This is expressed in Scholastic terms as follows: Philology and philosophy are taken oppositely or compositely.  
Oppositely, in reference to those three highest categories and, so to speak, heads, all liberal disciplines are related to Philology, Philosophy, and Theology.  
Compositely; as philosophy is divided into theoretical, practical, and poetic or organic.  
Thus, Philology is a part of philosophy; because poetic philosophy is precisely Philology itself.

VI. The term Philology is taken broadly or strictly.  
Philology, taken broadly, is the study or love of letters.  
Strictly, it is either the expertise of antiquity or the study or love of speaking or discussing.  
In the former sense, Philology encompasses the knowledge of languages and disciplines that revolve around discourse, and, finally, the knowledge of antiquity.  
It is, I say, a system of all the arts that pave the way to the stronghold of Philosophy.  
Thus, it is understood in Martianus Capella's Book 1 on the marriage of Philology, where he imagines Philology marrying Mercury.  
In the same sense, the renowned grammarian Ateius is called Philologist, as noted by Suetonius in the book on illustrious men.  
Thus, Plutarch in Lucullus says Lucullus was accustomed to "loving words with those who love words."  
And in the life of Cicero and in Athenaeus Book 5, the notion of this term is the same.  
Then, Philology, strictly, is the same as the investigation of antiquity.  
It is taken in this way by Seneca in the book on the death of Claudius; in letter 107, likewise by Photius in the Library.  
Thus, those who today are called antiquarians are called Philologists.  
Finally, this term, again strictly, is taken to mean the comprehension of liberal arts, which revolve around discourse, virtue, and ethics.  
This notion is the one considered in this Encyclopedia.

VII. The Term Philosophy Is Taken Generally and Specifically.
In every legitimate discussion, an explanation of the word opens the doors, and specifically the liberation of it from ambiguity.
Let us, therefore, remove the ambiguity of this word, which is φιλοσοφία (philosophy) and τῶν πολλαχῶς λεγομένων ("of the many things spoken").
Firstly, however, the term philosophy is taken generally, and indeed either most broadly or less broadly. 
Most broadly, it stands for all learning and doctrine, which can enter the mind of man.
And in this way, it encompasses under itself all faculties, as they call them, and from Cicero's 2nd "On Duties" it is thus defined: Philosophy is the knowledge of divine and human things, and the causes by which these are contained.
Compare the same in the 3rd "On the Orator," letter 1 "On Laws."
Under this most broad significance are contained the mechanical arts themselves, at least the more dignified and pure.
Thus, in this manner, philosophy and the encyclopedia are synonyms.
Aristotle speaks of this most broad acceptance in the 1st Metaphysics, chapter 1, when he says that all inventors of arts are σοφούς (wise men) or sapientes, even if those arts are manual: because namely the inventors of those arts were endowed with a certain fiery force of ingenuity above other men, by which they investigated the causes of things: which is of the philosopher.
And to this also pertain those five properties, gloriously ample and honorable, which Aristotle everywhere attributes to the philosopher.
These properties are: 1. To know everything, accurately, namely, and fully, what can be known.
2. To be able to teach those things which he knows.
For a sign of knowing is the ability to teach.
3. To know and teach everything both for his own sake and for the sake of the doctrine. For he who teaches for the sake of profit or gain is a mercenary; nor is he a sage, but a sophist.
4. To be free; so that he does not suspend his judgment either by the popular breeze and favor, or by the judgment of those who have acquired great authority for themselves: but to judge of things from the nature of things and his own conscience, not from servile obedience to other opinions.
Indeed, it is disgraceful for the intellect, which God has established as the lord of human affairs, to become a slave of foreign lust: as Scaliger calls the intellect in example 307, section 3.
5. Not to be human, but divine and honorable; because philosophy is a divine business placed above man.
And this is the broadest significance of philosophy.
Less broadly, this word is taken in two ways.
1. For the study of earthly and natural wisdom: so that it also encompasses Jurisprudence and Medicine.
2. For all disciplines, which are partly distinguished from the three superior faculties, namely Theology, Medicine, and Jurisprudence, partly from the mechanical arts.
And in this way, philosophy contains not only sciences and wisdoms but also arts: or, as others say, it encompasses objective and real disciplines, which come under the name τῶν θεωρητικῶν (the theoretics); likewise the directive or organic ones, which come under the name αἱ πρακτικαί (the practical).
And in this way, Plato and the Stoics accept this word; indeed Plato often, the Stoics always.
In the second place, the term philosophy is specifically accepted in five ways.
1. For the structure of real disciplines, excluding instrumental ones.
And this acceptance is Peripatetic.
2. For first philosophy or metaphysics, which in the 1st Metaphysics chapter 3 and book 11 chapters 3 and 4 is called νοητῆ θεωρία (intellectual theory).
3. For practical philosophy, or the doctrine of life to be well and honorably set up.
And this acceptance is Platonic.
In this sense also, Jurisprudence is called philosophy.
4. For Theology; which some call the one, true, and divine philosophy; because it is the truest wisdom, without which human wisdom is masked and pure foolishness.
5. For Medicine and specifically that which is more perfect and excellent.
For this is called philosophy by many, and by Severinus in the idea of Medicine, philosophy attained, that is, perfected.
For the Scholastics understand the word adeptus in this way, as can be seen in Scaliger's exercise 307, section 19, where he notes that an adept intellect is said to understand everything in actuality.
Here also it must not be passed over in silence, that the term philosophy is also accepted for a sect: as when Josephus in the 2nd "On the Jewish War," chapter 7 says that there are three kinds of philosophy, or three philosophies, that is, sects, among the Jews: namely the Pharisees, Sadducees, and Essenes.

VIII. The Term Philosophy Has Pythagoras as Its Author, and Is Retained in Schools Not Because It Is So Apt, but Because It Is Already Accepted.
It is known that philosophy is said to be from φιλεῖν (to love) and σοφία (wisdom): so that it is the love of wisdom, as Cicero interprets in the 2nd "On Duties."
Therefore, that notation is more allusive than exact, that the philosopher is φύλαξ σοφίας (guardian of wisdom), so that it ought to be written as phylosophus.
Moreover, σοφία (wisdom) and σοφὸς (wise) are rightly derived from σαφής (clear), because wisdom is clear and distinct knowledge by which the causes of things are known.
Hence Aristotle in the 1st "Posterior Analytics," chapter 2, says: To know is to know a thing through its causes.
And this is that Urim and Thummim, which was written on the breast of Aaron, some think: because by those two words clarity and perfection are signified.
Moreover, Pythagoras invented the term philosopher, as Diogenes Laërtius reports in his life, and Cicero in the prologue to the 5th "Tusculans."
For to him, the name σοφός (wise man) seemed too arrogant and presumptuous, so he preferred to be called a philosopher: because absolute wisdom belongs to God alone, while the study and love of wisdom belong to man.
And there note that Pythagoras did not want to be called great, as the Chaldeans, Persians, and other Eastern philosophers were named: nor sophist, as Western philosophers were called, nor σοφὸς or σοφιστικὸς, as the more Eastern Greeks were named: but philosopher for the sake of distinction and modesty.
But truly, although Pythagoras's modesty is praised; it would have been better, however, if the art had been left the name of wisdom.
For here it is not to be regarded what men can or cannot do, but the very nature of things is to be attended to.
Indeed, if the strengths of human ingenuity must give names to things, then there would be no virtue or doctrine to which the name φιλοσοφία (love of wisdom), should not be prefixed: nor should we say anymore διακοσμῆσαι (to adorn), but φιλοδιακοσμῆσαι (to love to adorn); nor θεολογία (theology), but φιλοθεολογία (love of theology).
Then, we all can be philosophers, i.e., lovers of wisdom, even the rustic and common people; but not all can be σοφοί (wise), i.e., sages and investigators of causes.
Although indeed this word is not altogether so apt, it nevertheless is not for that reason not to be used; since it is known that words are worth the same as coins.

IX. Philosophy, as a Collective Entity, Cannot Be Perfectly Defined.
Collective or aggregate entities encompass things of multiple categories or several things of a single category, distinct in species, and therefore do not admit a perfect definition.
Examples are the world, an army, and a forest.
Indeed, such things do not have a single essence on their own.
A perfect definition, however, is an explanation of a single essence.
But, you may say, philosophy is a habit; and the disciplines that it encompasses are also habits.
Therefore, philosophy is in one category, namely quality.
But I say, philosophy is a mixed habit composed of various habits differing in specific essence, of which one common and exact concept cannot be given.
See Julius Pacius in the prolegomena on Aristotle's Physics.

X. Various Definitions of Philosophy Compared Among Themselves Provide an Approximation of Its Perfect Definition.
Numerous definitions of philosophy circulate, which some simply reject.
We think a comparison between them should be made, so that in this way it might be possible to arrive at a definition that is as close as possible to the perfect one.
Let us, therefore, gather at least a few of the main ones.
First, Plato presents himself, who offers these definitions here and there: Philosophy is the likeness of God, as far as it is possible for a man to be similar to God.
Also, philosophy is the knowledge of divine and human things, and of the causes that are contained in them.
Cicero in the 2nd "On Duties" and all the Stoics maintained this definition.
Toletus and others, especially the Platonists, contend that this definition is the most perfect of all.
Plato also says: φιλοσοφία ἐστὶ μελέτη θανάτου, Philosophy is the meditation on death.
Ammonius on Porphyry's Isagoge explains this definition correctly as follows: that the meditation on death for Plato is nothing else but a rapture of the soul, or the elevation of the soul that clings to the body, and indeed an abstraction of thoughts from particulars to universals, from materials to immaterials, and finally from sensual pleasure to that practical and intellectual one.
Hence the Platonists say that the task of the true philosopher is to meditate on death, i.e., to labor at this, to withdraw and separate the soul from the snares and commerce of bodily pleasures.
For the mind is distracted from the contemplation of the truth and the action of good by the allurements of pleasures and the contagion of the body.
And this is the Platonic ecstasy, by which it happens that the philosopher often has open eyes and does not see, that is, does not loosen the reins to the affections.
Others define philosophy as the offspring of ignorance and its medicine; likewise, medicine that heals the diseases of the soul.
It is called the offspring of ignorance because ignorance gives birth to admiration, admiration to inquiry and knowledge, and thus to philosophy.
Thus to philosophize is to seek the causes of things we admire and which we do not know.
For just as there is a starting point in motion, a medium through which, and an endpoint to which, so in the study of philosophy there is ignorance of causes, from which through admiration and discourse we are led to the knowledge of causes, which is true philosophy.
But when it is said that philosophy heals the diseases of the soul, this is to be understood so that what is proper to Theology is not transferred to philosophy: which indeed seems to have been done in that rhetorical definition of philosophy in Apuleius and Cicero: Philosophy is the investigator of virtue and expeller of vices, participant in divine matters.
Although if this definition is taken with a grain of salt, it can also be attributed to philosophy: so namely that theology remains the sun, philosophy the moon.
Aristotle in the 2nd Metaphysics, chapter 1, says: Philosophy is ἐπιστήμη ἀληθείας, the science of truth.
Where the philosopher speaks only of theoretical philosophy.
Cicero in the 1st "On the Orator" describes it thus: Philosophy is the bundle of all praised arts.
Where the name bundle is very appropriate because it expresses the nature of philosophy, as far as it is placed in the burning, collecting, and aggregating of various things.
For Simplicius, that most celebrated interpreter of Aristotle, philosophy is the perfection of the human soul.
For Damascenus in chapters 3 and 65 of Dialectic, philosophy is τέχνη τεχνῶν, ἐπιστήμη ἐπιστημῶν, the art of arts, and the science of sciences, and the principle of every art.
But let us come to the more recent: among whom first occurs that songstress of Germany, Philipp Melanchthon, for whom philosophy is the knowledge of the arts of speaking, physiology, and the precepts of morals, as much as the human mind can achieve in this weakness.
Peter Martyr in the prolegomena to Aristotle's Ethics says: Philosophy is a habit granted to human minds by God, increased by industry and exercise, by which are comprehended all things that are, which, namely, can be comprehended by sure and firm reasoning, so that man can attain happiness.
Fortunatus Crellius in the prolegomena to Aristotle's acroamatics says: Philosophy is a habit of the mind, which consists of knowledge and wisdom.
For Keckermann, philosophy is the apt structure of sciences and wisdoms.
Others call philosophy the collection of Prometheus's fire.
Which poetic description can be explained from Plutarch in this manner.
All the arts are small insights, or streams and particles of wisdom, by which our life is irrigated.
Which particles and fragments of wisdom, after they have been arranged in a definite order, obtain the name of art.
And these are the sparks, which Prometheus distributed to mortals.
These collected sparks form a great body of fire and flame from which illustrious heights of the arts have shone forth.
From these definitions, rejecting those that should be rejected, we have constructed such a one: Philosophy is the comprehension of the lower liberal disciplines; which others call studies of humanity.
Comprehension, I say, either expressed in writing or impressed upon the mind.
In this way, philosophy is a system of many systems; in that way, it is a mixed habit, or a constant collection of many habits.

XI. In establishing the order of philosophical disciplines, it is very useful to compare the various divisions of various authors among themselves and to prefer that which agrees with the subject, object, and purpose of Philosophy. 
Philosophy is a whole and indeed a collection, the nature of which cannot be fully understood without a suitable division. 
However, we will only achieve this if we first briefly gather the more famous distributions of ancient and recent philosophers, and then choose that which agrees with the subject, object, and purpose of Philosophy. 
To begin with, concerning the ancient divisions of philosophy, the division of Zeno and Chrysippus, and indeed of the Stoics, who especially followed these two authors, is noted: Laërtius recounts in book 7. about the defects of philosophers, that they divided philosophy into Logic, Physics, and Ethics. 
They said Logic was the fence of all philosophy against the attacks of insolent sophists; Physics they compared to a garden, in which flowers and trees of all kinds are seen; Ethics they likened to the sky, which nourished that garden. 
They also said that philosophy was like an animal, whose bones are akin to Logic, flesh to Ethics, and soul to Physics; likewise like a city, in which Logic performs the role of walls, Physics of citizens, Ethics of laws. 
Cicero, nevertheless, attributes this division to Plato in Acad. quaest. 1 with these words: There was, I say, a threefold plan of philosophy received from Plato: one concerning life and morals; another about nature and hidden things; the third about debate. 
And in de Orat. to Quintus, the brother, he says: All philosophy is distributed into three parts: into the obscurity of nature, into the subtlety of debating, into life and morals. 
But because this division does not occur in the writings of Plato, Cicero perhaps had regard to this, that all of Plato's dialogues are either moral, such as Alcibiades, or natural, such as Timaeus, or dialectical, such as Parmenides. 
However, in Plato's writings, this division of philosophy occurs, that it is either propagéa or paedia. 
Propagéa is that which prepares the mind for more serious disciplines and is completed by arts strictly spoken. 
Paedia encompasses the sciences and prudences themselves. 
From Cicero’s rhetorical partitions and the last book of topics to Trebatius, a technology is thus nearly gathered: that disciplines are either defined and special, or undefined and general. 
Regarding recent authors, their chief technologies are these: the most renowned division, by which philosophy is divided into Natural, Moral, and Dialectical. 
See the Coimbra College in the preface to Aristotle’s Physics and Possevin in book 2. of the library, chapter 3. This is succeeded by that whereby philosophical disciplines are divided into theoretical and practical: and practical into moral, which direct the actions of the will, and effectual or poetic, which direct the actions of the intellect; and these are subdivided into internal or liberal, and external or mechanical, whose divisions are fourfold. 
Firstly, some prepare the material, as purifying metals; others accomplish the work, as manufacturing weapons; others use the completed work, as Military. 
Then, some are principal and almost masters of others, such as Architecture; others are subservient and subjected, or Masonry. 
Thirdly, some leave no completed work after the action, such as the art of guitar players; others do, of which three kinds are handed down. 
For some create new things, like the art of potters; others restore the collapsed, like Surgery; others provide both, like the art of building. 
Fourthly, some are arranged for providing necessities, as Baking; others for a better or more pleasant life, as Gladiatorial games, to sustain life, and for delight, Perfumery. 
Thirdly, some divide philosophical disciplines into superior, such as Moral and Natural sciences; and inferior, such as the seven liberal arts, which are divided into the trivium and quadrivium. 
There are Grammar, Rhetoric & Dialectic; here Arithmetic, Geometry, Astrology, & Music. 
Fourthly, some divide philosophy into an organic part and inorganic. The former encompasses arts in the strict sense of the term: the latter is divided into speculative and active. 
This division coincides with that by which philosophy is divided into directive disciplines (others call them normative and instrumental) and objective or real. 
Philosophy is also divided in the same sense into a general part, which comprises arts; and a special part, which contains sciences and prudences. 
Others divide philosophy into theoretical and practical parts, excluding arts, which they say are not parts but instruments of philosophy. 
This is Keckermann’s view in book 1. of preliminary philosophy, chapter 2. Furthermore, Timpler in chapter 3 of technology subdivides liberal art into principal and less principal: the principal into theological and philosophical; the less principal he calls philological. 
Toletus in the prolegomena to the organ divides philosophy into three parts: Speculative, Active, and Technical.
Some followers of Ramus make some arts of speech, others of reason. 
From all these divisions of philosophy, both old and recent, the best of all is that which divides philosophical disciplines (with the term philosophy indeed broadly accepted) into theoretical, practical, and poetic: or if you prefer a dichotomy, which divides philosophy into theoretical and practical: and subdivides the latter into active and constructive. 
For this division agrees with the subject, object, and purpose of philosophy. 
It also agrees with the rules of Logic, and is ultimately approved by classical philosophers. 
For firstly, the subject of instruction in philosophy is the soul of man, which is perceived to have three duties, namely to contemplate, to act upon the precept of virtue, and to do those things which make this life easier. 
Since therefore the human soul is that to which all philosophy is destined (hence Platonic philosophy is "theoretical virtues of the soul"), assuredly it is necessary that philosophy and its parts be arranged and distributed according to the duties of the soul: namely that a part of philosophy should be theoretical, which teaches the way of clear understanding; another practical, which teaches the way of living well and happily; and finally another poetic, which teaches the way of easily acquiring both theory and practice. 
Secondly, the object or subject of discussion (which is usually called external, whereas the former subject is called internal) in philosophy are things themselves, which can be very rightly reduced to two classes, such that some are necessary, others contingent. 
Necessary things are God and what God has produced, such that man can produce them by no wisdom or art, but only contemplate them. 
They are otherwise called immutable things, because they cannot be changed by man. 
Thus no man, however great a monarch, can create heaven, earth, wind; nor can he prevent wind or rain. 
Contingent things are those which man can not only know but also produce when he wishes: by the office of temperance and liberality man can not only know, but also by his will produce, that is, he can act temperately and liberally. 
Likewise, he can establish a home and family, govern a state. 
Hence these things are called mutable. 
However, these contingent things are of two kinds: namely, actions of virtue and works of the liberal arts (we do not treat here of servile works) of which the former concern the will, the latter the poetic intellect. 
Since therefore every thing which is treated in philosophy is either only knowable, or knowable and producible at the same time, and indeed producible either through prudence or through art, hence philosophy is rightly divided into contemplative, which deals with necessary things, and active, which explains actions of virtue; and constructive, which deals with artificial actions. 
But, you ask, Geometry and all mathematical disciplines deal with things that can be made by human work, namely lines. 
But, I say, this is done by reason of poetry, which accompanies the entire mathematics. 
Thirdly, this division is confirmed by the purpose of philosophy, which is the knowledge of truth and the action of good. 
The knowledge of truth is that which revolves around the truth in such a way that it rests in itself. 
The action of good is either moral or artificial. 
The knowledge of truth is sought in contemplative philosophy; the action of moral good in practice, the production of artificial good in poetry. 
Contemplative indeed, absolutely considered, rests in knowing: while practical and poetic teach to know, not that we may rest there, but that we may express the known by moral or artificial work. 
Moreover, this division agrees with the logical rules; which neither has a division broader than its own, nor narrower, and has parts different from one another. 
For although in every discipline there is theory and practice, knowledge and use together: yet not every discipline is therefore both theoretical and practical at the same time. 
For the knowledge or contemplation is either pure or mixed. 
The former is strictly called, the latter broadly. 
The former is the knowledge of a necessary thing, which cannot be produced by us; the latter is the knowledge of any thing, whether necessary or contingent. 
And in the latter way, practical philosophy explains the nature, parts, and properties of virtue, the republic, etc., not that they may be known, but that they may be enacted. 
Thus also the term of practice or use is ambiguous. 
For if taken broadly, every discipline should have some use. 
But strictly, use regards moral and artificial perfection: and so theoretical philosophy has no practice. 
Finally, this division has the support of the greatest philosophers.
For Aristotle, as testified by Laërtius in his life, consistently retained this division of philosophy until his death, and with its aid most successfully educated his listeners.  
The Peripatetic philosophers, particularly Theophrastus, Alexander of Aphrodisias, Themistius, Simplicius, Boethius, and other ancient philosophers, also retained it.  
Notably, there is the account of Boethius, who flourished around the year 500 after the birth of Christ, born of patrician descent, and serving as an envoy to the Goths who were invading Italy, by whom he suffered martyrdom.  
Boethius was the first to write the philosophy of Aristotle in Latin, and at the beginning of his commentary on "The Consolation of Philosophy," he graphically describes its division thus: While I was silently reflecting on this within myself, and designating a most tearful complaint in the role of a pen, a woman appeared to stand before me, with a very venerable face, eyes burning and more penetrating than the common strength of men, with a lively color and of inexhaustible vigor, although she was so full of herself that she would not in any way be believed of our age, of ambiguous stature of elegance.  
For now she indeed confined herself to the common measure of men, and now, however, she seemed to strike the sky with the top of her head, and when she lifted her head even higher, she penetrated the very heavens, frustrating the gaze of those beholding her.  
Her garments were of the thinnest thread, made by subtle art, perfected by indissoluble material, which, as you later learned, she had woven with her own hands.  
A certain fog of neglected antiquity had covered the appearance of these, as smoky images are accustomed.  
On the far margin of these was read 𝛼, indeed on the uppermost 𝛍 was inscribed.  
And between the two letters, in the manner of stairs, certain steps seemed distinguished, by which ascent was from the lower to the upper element.  
Yet certain violent hands had torn this same garment, and each took away any pieces they could.  
In her right hand she indeed held books, while in the left a scepter.  
From this image of philosophy, it appears what kind of division Boethius approved of, namely that in which philosophy is divided into theoretical and practical, under which we understand poetic.  
For by 𝛼 he understands theoretical, by 𝛑 he understands practical.  
The Academics and Stoics also approved of this threefold division of philosophy.  
For, as we saw a little before from Cicero, a threefold concept of philosophy was received from Plato: one concerning life and morals, another concerning nature and hidden things; the third concerning discourse, and what is true, what is false, what is right or crooked in oration, what is consistent, what is contradictory by judging.  
Hence they divided philosophy into Ethics or Morals, Physics or Natural, and Logic.  
Where you should remember, the words are to be taken broadly; so that Ethics encompasses prudences, Physics sciences, Logic all and singular arts.  
Augustine also approves of this very division in book 8 of "The City of God," chapter 4, and book 1, chapter 25, where he discusses almost in this manner: Just as there are three things considered in any craftsman as he accomplishes something; nature, doctrine, use; of which the first is judged by talent, the second by knowledge, the third by experience: so a threefold discipline had to be found by philosophers: Natural because of nature. Rational because of doctrine. Moral because of use.  
And since man is created by God to reach that which is superior in all by that which excels in himself, through this kind of threefold knowledge he reaches the one, true, most excellent God, without whom no nature subsists, no doctrine instructs, no use is beneficial.  
Thus, according to Augustine's opinion, these three parts of philosophy are like three steps, by which true philosophers strive to approach closer to the likeness of God.  
Someone could also aptly call these same parts illuminating, purifying, and perfecting.  
For Dialectic, while distinguishing truth from falsehood through the craft of arguing, enlightens the mind with the light of truth that is spread; moral philosophy, while it arranges morals, and plucks out roots of vices, purifies the will; natural philosophy, while it adorns the mind with a higher understanding of hidden things, perfects it.  
See more on this opinion in Philo Judeaus's book "On Farmers," Laërtius on Zeno, and Plotinus book 3, Ennead 1, on the triple ascent to the intelligible world.

XII. Theoretical philosophy informs the theoretical intellect of man; practical philosophy informs the will and practical intellect; poetic philosophy informs the poetic intellect. 
And the practical is the most noble of all, insofar as it has the nature of an end.

The contention between theoretical and practical philosophy cannot be discussed without recognizing how uncertain the dispute is, namely which is more excellent. 
To settle this controversy, a distinction is needed. 
The subject of information for theoretical philosophy is the theoretical intellect, while the subject of treatment or doctrine is truth. 
However, the subject of information for practical philosophy is the will, as well as the practical intellect; the subject of treatment is moral goodness.
Indeed, the intellect is prior to the will. 
For the intellect casts a light before the will; whence that to the lord, this to the lady; the former is likened to the sun, the latter to the moon. 
The theoretical intellect is also prior to the practical, because practice presupposes knowledge. 
Truth is also prior to good, because good is founded upon truth. 
Therefore, up to this point, the theoretical is nobler than the practical, insofar as the latter depends on the former.
But conversely, practical philosophy is more excellent than theoretical philosophy, insofar as the former has the nature of an end, and the latter the nature of a means. 
For theoretical philosophy is considered either absolutely, and thus it is content with naked knowledge, and experiences it for its own sake: or relatively, and thus it is ordained to the action of good. 
For we contemplate the truth in order to more readily undertake the action of good and progress more successfully in it.
In short, theoretical philosophy, the intellect, and truth are more excellent, as they have the nature of an efficient cause, upon which practical philosophy, the will, and good depend. 
But practical philosophy, the will, and good are more excellent, as they have the nature of an end, to which theoretical philosophy, the intellect, and truth lead and conduct as means. 
And this end perfects contemplation, because from naked knowledge (which can be diabolical) it creates affective knowledge.
Therefore, though theoretical philosophy is more excellent initiatively, so to speak, practical philosophy is more excellent terminatively, as it is the terminus and end of the theoretical. 
In this sense, we place practical philosophy in the highest degree of dignity. 
Considered in this way, it begets the highest good for man, namely the contemplation of God as the eternal Father by right of creation; just as faith in Christ begets the highest good for the Christian man, which is placed in the contemplation of God as the eternal Father by right of redemption.
In sum, practical philosophy is nobler than theoretical, insofar as it has the nature of an end and is the proximate cause of the highest good: theoretical is nobler, insofar as it is the efficient cause of the practical. 
Thus, a natural power, as it is the cause of operation, is nobler; as operation is the end of power, the power resulting is less noble. 
For power is for the sake of operation.
Furthermore, theoretical philosophy is superior regarding the nature of knowledge, because the dignity of knowledge, as it is knowledge, is not estimated from fruit or necessity, but from the manner in which it reaches its object; which manner is more eminent in theoretical than in practical matters; and thus knowledge is considered a more honorable good; but practical philosophy is a more useful good because it concerns us more to live well than to contemplate.
With respect to this or that office and person, theoretical or practical philosophy may now be more desirable. 
Ultimately, that contemplation which follows the action of good is nobler than the action itself. 
But this contemplation is of a different kind than that considered in theoretical philosophy. 
And in this sense, the contemplative life is more excellent than the practical, insofar as it is understood as contemplation following the action of virtue; which is commonly called Seraphic contemplation.

XIII. The parts of theoretical philosophy are distinguished according to the variety of abstraction.  
The reason is that different abstractions are necessarily accompanied by different kinds of knowability, as it is said, that is, modes of knowing.  
Therefore, there are as many contemplative sciences, if you consider their heads, as there are abstractions.  
There are, however, three abstractions in total.  
The first abstraction is from singular sensible matter, and this belongs to the natural philosopher.  
For he considers man as consisting of both soul and organic body, and does not examine singular matter, such as Peter or Paul.  
The second abstraction is from common sensible matter, only in reason, not in reality: and this pertains to the mathematician.  
For although the mathematician contemplates the properties of triangles, and other such things, which adhere in sensible matter, he does not consider them insofar as they are in such matter: because he does not consider a wooden or iron triangle, but a triangle in general.  
The third abstraction is finally from all matter, both in reality and in reason simultaneously: which pertains to Metaphysics and Pneumatics.  
For these disciplines are engaged in the knowledge of those things which neither consist in matter nor include it in their concept: and therefore abstract from all sensible matter, whether it be common or singular, and from intelligible matter.  
What we have said about abstraction from matter is understood similarly about separation from motion.  
From these, it is understood that there are three principal parts of speculative philosophy: metaphysics, physics, and mathematics.

XIV. Certain parts of philosophy are sometimes not called by this name, for five reasons.  
Either because they deal with easier or less important matters; or because they are not content with the knowledge of truth itself; or because they do not seem to pertain to living well and happily; or because they do not concern things that subsist by themselves; or because they do not deliver the very first principles of the things they discuss.  
Due to the first reason, mathematical disciplines are often not included among the parts of philosophy. Aristotle, Metaphysics 4, chapter 2. Plato, Republic 7. Cicero, On the Orator 1. Alexander at the beginning of the commentary on the first Analytics.  
Due to the second reason, sometimes only the contemplative disciplines are considered worthy of the name of philosophy. Aristotle, Metaphysics 1, chapter 1.  
Due to the third reason, sometimes only the practical are signified by the term philosophy. Plato on Philosophy.  
Due to the fourth, often only physical sciences are regarded as parts of philosophy. Aristotle, Metaphysics 4, chapter 2, text 4.  
Due to the fifth, the name of philosophy is often attributed solely to first philosophy. Aristotle, Metaphysics 4, chapter 2 & chapter 3, texts 7 and 8.  
Therefore, when we see that certain disciplines are excluded from the number of parts of philosophy for these and other reasons, we should not consider them to be simply rejected from the realm of philosophy.

XV. The intermediate mathematical sciences are more mathematical than physical.  
For insofar as their mode is mathematical, because they use the principles, maxims, and demonstrations of mathematics; but as for their object, they are natural.  
However, the mode is prior in sciences than the object, because it is formal, while this is material.  
An illustration of our assertion can be sought from the following table.

